Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

A
0

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Financial Economics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/finec

Growing the efficient frontier on panel trees✩

Lin William Cong a,d,e , Guanhao Feng b ,∗, Jingyu He b , Xin He c
a SC Johnson College of Business, Cornell University, United States of America
b City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
c International Institute of Finance, Faculty of Business for Science and Technology, School of Management, University of Science and Technology of China, China
d Fudan University FISF, China
e NBER, United States of America

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Dataset link: Growing the Efficient Frontier on P We introduce a new class of tree-based models, P-Trees, for analyzing (unbalanced) panel of individual asset
anel Trees (Original data) returns, generalizing high-dimensional sorting with economic guidance and interpretability. Under the mean–
JEL classification: variance efficient framework, P-Trees construct test assets that significantly advance the efficient frontier
C1 compared to commonly used test assets, with alphas unexplained by benchmark pricing models. P-Tree
G11 tangency portfolios also constitute traded factors, recovering the pricing kernel and outperforming popular
G12 observable and latent factor models for investments and cross-sectional pricing. Finally, P-Trees capture the

complexity of asset returns with sparsity, achieving out-of-sample Sharpe ratios close to those attained only
Keywords: by over-parameterized large models.
Decision tree
Factors
Generative models
Interpretable AI
Test assets
1. Introduction studies typically consider a ‘‘diversified’’ set of test assets (e.g., ME-
BM 25 portfolios) to estimate and evaluate factor models, hoping

Estimating the mean–variance efficient (MVE) frontier is crucial these test assets or a few common factors can span the same efficient
for asset pricing and investment management. Yet, estimating the frontier as individual assets. However, popular factor models hardly
tangency portfolio (Markowitz, 1952) using the unbalanced panel of explain the cross section of conventional pre-specified test assets (e.g.,
thousands of individual asset returns proves impracticable. Empirical Kozak et al., 2018; Lopez-Lira and Roussanov, 2020), not to mention

✩ We are grateful to Fahiz Baba-Yara (discussant), Svetlana Bryzgalova (discussant), John Campbell, Vic Chien, Andrei Goncalves, Bing Han, Kewei Hou, Bob
Jarrow, Ron Kaniel, Chris Malloy, Alberto Rossi (discussant), Gideon Saar, Shrihari Santosh (discussant), Artem Streltsov, Ziying Sun (discussant), Peixuan Yuan
(discussant), and Guofu Zhou for detailed comments and suggestions. We also thank Doron Avramov, Jie Cao, Zhanhui Chen, Eric Ghysels, P. Richard Hahn,
Dashan Huang, Sophia Zhengzi Li, Asaf Manela, Stefan Nagel, Adam Reed, Artem Streltsov, Yinan Su, Fred Sun, Yaki Tsaig, Mao Ye, Dacheng Xiu, Bobby Yu, and
seminar and conference participants at ArrowStreet Capital, 2024 AsianFA Annual Meeting, Baylor University, BUAA, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Cambridge
University Algorithmic Trading Society Quant Conference, CFTRC 2022, CityUHK, CKGSB, Conference on FinTech, Innovation and Development at Hangzhou
(2nd), Cornell University, 2024 EFMA Annual Meeting, Goethe University Frankfurt, GSU-RFS FinTech Conference 2022, HKAIFT-Columbia joint seminar, Hunan
University, INFORMS Annual Meeting 2021, 4th International FinTech Research Forum (RUC), 2023 Mid-South DATA Conference (Memphis), KAIST Digital
Finance Conference, NFA 2022, University of Oxford SML-Fin Seminar, OSU, PHBS, PKU Guanghua, PKU-NSD, PKU-NUS Annual International Conference on
Quantitative Finance and Economics, Qube Research and Technology, Reichman University (IDC Herzliya), Schroders Investments, Shanghai Financial Forefront
Symposium (3rd), SHUFE, NUS, SMU, SUSTech, TAMU, Tsinghua SEM, UNC, University of Bath, University of Hawai’i, USC, USTC, University of Macau, World
Online Seminars on Machine Learning in Finance, WFA 2022, and 2023 XJTLU AI and Big Data in Accounting and Finance Conference for constructive discussions
and feedback. Feng’s research is partly supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (GRF-11502721, GRF-11502023) and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC-72203190). He J.’s research is partly supported by the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (ECS-21504921, GRF-11507022, GRF-
11509224) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-72403214). Feng and He J. are partly supported by the InnoHK initiative and the
Laboratory for AI-Powered Financial Technologies. The authors also acknowledge research awards from INQUIRE Europe and IQAM Research.
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: will.cong@cornell.edu (L.W. Cong), gavin.feng@cityu.edu.hk (G. Feng), jingyuhe@cityu.edu.hk (J. He), xin.he@ustc.edu.cn (X. He).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104024
Received 20 November 2023; Received in revised form 4 February 2025; Accepted
vailable online 18 February 2025 
304-405X/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access a
 5 February 2025

rticle under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

I
f

s
p

c
f

v c
s
f

M
t
l

o

e
t
a

s

f

a

o a

P

f
t
o

s f
e
f

u
t
f

r
s
e
T

the ad hoc nature of these test assets hampers the effectiveness of
model estimations and evaluations (Lewellen et al., 2010; Ang et al.,
2020). For example, characteristics-based test assets are often limited
to univariate- and bivariate-sorted portfolios due to the challenges of
high-dimensional sorting (Cochrane, 2011), overlooking nonlinearity
and asymmetric interactions (that do not uniformly apply to all assets),
even with dependent sorting (Daniel et al., 1997). These problems
annot be fully addressed by evaluating different test assets separately
or robustness checks (e.g., Fama and French, 1996), selecting test

assets (Daniel et al., 2020; Giglio et al., 2023; Bryzgalova et al., 2023),
or combining test assets (e.g., Feng et al., 2020).

The evaluation of factor models and test assets is about mean–
ariance diversification and, therefore, the performance of the tangency

portfolio constructed using these test assets or factors. Cochrane (2011)
tates that expected returns, variances, and covariances are stable
unctions of asset characteristics (e.g., size, value), and Kelly et al.

(2019) further show return-factor covariances are associated with char-
acteristics. The key to bridging the gap between the ultimate efficient
frontier and tangency portfolios of test assets or factors spanning the
SDF therefore lies in systematically utilizing the high-dimensional asset
characteristics, which contain rich information on the joint distribution
f asset returns dynamics (e.g., Kozak and Nagel, 2022).

To achieve this, we propose a new approach that integrates nonlin-
arity and asymmetric interactions with the high-dimensional charac-
eristics to create test assets that span the efficient frontier of individual
sset returns. The Panel Tree (P-Tree) framework is inspired by modern

AI and constitutes a versatile family of models that cluster panel
observations to achieve given economic objectives. Creating test assets
requires clustering individual assets into groups to form portfolios.1
Under a global split criterion for goal-oriented search, P-Tree clus-
ters individual asset returns and creates basis portfolios. It utilizes
high-dimensional characteristics under the MVE framework to jointly
generate test assets and a latent factor, which is the MVE portfolio of
test assets, and recovers the stochastic discount factor (SDF). Therefore,
P-Tree extends the scope of regression tree models beyond pure predic-
tion tasks, particularly generating diversified test assets that reach the
ultimate efficient frontier.2

Specifically, P-Tree employs a ‘‘top-down’’ approach (typical trees
re drawn with the root at the top), splitting the cross section of

thousands of individual assets and grouping them into a small number
f clusters based on characteristic values to form (value-weighted)

portfolios. Guided by asset pricing considerations, we grow a P-Tree to
iteratively construct test assets and latent factors for the SDF, following
the baseline specification of the global split criterion that maximizes
the Sharpe ratio of the SDF. The high Sharpe ratio of the constructed
SDF reflects the high MVE frontier spanned by the generated leaf basis
portfolios. The resulting leaf basis portfolios and latent factors provide
researchers with a diversified set of test assets and the SDF model.
Furthermore, P-Trees are intuitive and transparent, allowing economic
interpretation and identifying a sparse set of useful characteristics that
interact to generate test assets and latent factors jointly.

Fundamentally, P-Tree is a greedy search algorithm guided by asset
pricing goals for optimal clustering based on similar characteristic
values within a large modeling space. In empirical asset pricing, basis
portfolios are usually formed by grouping assets based on classifications
uch as countries or industries, or through unsupervised clustering

1 The commonly used security sorting in empirical research is one type of
nsupervised clustering based on firm characteristics, similar to the decision
ree (Bryzgalova et al., 2023). However, no unified method has been developed
or sorting securities and generating test assets.

2 Tree-based models excel in predicting complex data with high dimen-
ionality, nonlinearity, and variable interactions, even in low signal-to-noise
nvironments and small sample sizes (e.g., Sorensen et al., 2000; Rossi and
immermann, 2015; Gu et al., 2020; Bianchi et al., 2021; Capponi and Yu,

2024).
 l

2 
(e.g., security sorting) based on return correlations or characteristics.
n contrast, P-Tree generates characteristics-managed leaf basis port-
olios to maximize the Sharpe ratio of their MVE portfolios, without

being either supervised or unsupervised. The objective can be flexibly
pecified, making the P-Tree framework applicable for a wide range of
anel data analyses.3

Methodological innovations. Our asset pricing application effectively
demonstrates the key methodological innovations. First, off-the-shelf
ML methods, including the famous Classification and Regression
Trees (CART, Breiman et al., 1984), typically assume that observations
are i.i.d., and not designed for analyzing panel data. Though naively
fitting CART or tree ensembles (boosted trees or random forest) on
haracteristics-return data shows positive predictive performance (e.g.,

Gu et al., 2020), they ignore the panel data structure. Alternatively,
P-Tree fully embraces the panel data structure and incorporates a
time-invariant tree structure for multi-period observations. The time-
invariant P-Tree allows for economic interpretability when building

L models on panel data. For example, similar to security sorting, the
ime-invariant P-Tree allows the same set of characteristics-managed
eaf basis portfolios for all periods.

Second, the standard tree-based models in ML, including CART,
focus purely on prediction. Furthermore, CART-based models grow
recursively, optimizing the quadratic loss of prediction. These models
optimize locally at each node without considering sibling nodes, mainly
for computational efficiency. However, this ‘‘myopic’’ strategy often
leads to overfitting, because it operates on fewer observations in each
node as the tree grows. By contrast, P-Trees broaden the applications
beyond prediction, encompassing the generation of test assets and
latent factors. The iterative growth of P-Trees is designed to utilize
data from the entire cross section to guard against the overfitting
that afflicts conventional trees grown using local split criteria. P-Trees
combine economic principles and nonlinear ML algorithms while en-
uring the interpretability of the graphical tree diagram, providing a

unified approach for splitting the cross section and growing the efficient
rontier.

Third, the P-Tree framework can integrate the boosting or bagging
strategy of ML, enabling multiple P-Trees to form a multi-factor model.
On the one hand, the Boosted P-Tree grows additional P-Trees based
on the previous ones, providing a unified framework for a multi-
factor model, such that additional factors and test assets must provide
n incremental contribution. The ensemble approach makes P-Tree

a versatile tool that can enhance the performance of any predeter-
mined factor model by exploiting the unspanned efficient frontier under
the MVE framework. When boosted to generate multiple factors, P-
Trees offer an alternative to principal component analysis (PCA) and
deep neural networks, with greater interpretability and sparsity, while
capturing (asymmetric) interactions.4 On the other hand, the random
-Forest generates additional P-Trees on random bootstrap samples,

offering a unified framework to create multiple sets of uncorrelated
actors and test assets, which can be used to assess characteristic impor-
ance. A large random P-Forest is also connected to the recent literature
f large and over-parameterized models (e.g., Didisheim et al., 2024).
Empirical findings. First, we study monthly U.S. equity returns from
1981 to 2020 using 61 firm characteristics. The P-Tree tangency port-
olios are constructed as traded factors, significantly advancing the
fficient frontier with high annualized Sharpe ratios, ranging from 6.37
or a single P-Tree (with 10 portfolios) to 15.63 for 20 boosted P-

Trees (with 200 portfolios). These numbers are substantially higher

3 We have developed and shared the P-Tree package, PTree, in a public
epository in R for other researchers to explore (see https://github.com/

Quantactix/PTree).
4 Other recent studies explore latent factors on PCA (Kelly et al., 2019;

Lettau and Pelger, 2020; Kim et al., 2021; He et al., 2023) and deep
earning (e.g., Gu et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2024; Feng et al., 2024).



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

t
f
c
t t
P g
s a

t
e
h

a
l

a

g

m
m

f

l

e
T
i r

g

f
s w
a d

v
h
a
s

r

p
m

p

than those constructed by conventional basis portfolios (univariate-
or bivariate-sorted portfolios) or commonly used factor models. These
indings provide strong evidence of a significant gap between the
urrent empirical literature and the potential limits of the efficient fron-
ier. Moreover, generated under the unified MVE framework, boosted
-Trees produce multi-factor models that effectively price the cross-
ectional returns. Also, P-Tree factors offer annualized Sharpe ratios

over 3 and significantly positive alphas in OOS analyses for past-
predicting-future and future-predicting-past tests.5

Second, these diversified P-Tree test assets span the efficient frontier
nd pose a significant challenge for alternative factor models, high-
ighting the importance of test assets. We identify many economically

and statistically unexplained test assets, indicated by most monthly
alphas larger than 1%, and an extremely high GRS test statistic of
141.27 (aggregated weighted pricing error) for the first P-Tree against
the Fama–French five-factor model (Fama and French, 2015). These
asymmetric, interactive, and nonlinear characteristics-managed leaf
basis portfolios are difficult to explain using other well-known observ-
able factor models (e.g., Hou et al., 2021) and ML-based latent factor
models (e.g., Kelly et al., 2019; Lettau and Pelger, 2020). Given the
insufficient MVE spanning and low hurdles of univariate- or bivariate-
sorted portfolios for model testing, we recommend including these

ulti-characteristic, systematically sorted P-Tree test assets in future
odel evaluations.

Finally, we design a random P-Forest with bagging to evaluate
characteristic importance, account for variable selection risk, and val-
idate transparent and interpretable P-Tree models. We confirm that
the same small set of characteristics (e.g., SUE, DOLVOL, and BM_IA)
selected by P-Trees are likely proxies for the true fundamental risk
inherent in the SDF, which may be overlooked in a linear factor model
with ad hoc selected factors. In addition, the random P-Forest SDF as
a large regularized model has an excellent OOS Sharpe ratio, which
shows similar patterns to the random split SDF but is significantly more
efficient in computation. In a sense, goal-oriented search improves upon
brute-force large models with statistical and economic regularizations,
ffectively combining economic objectives with ML models. Finally, P-
rees display all split rules, aiding researchers in understanding feature

nteractions.6

Literature. P-Trees constitute the first goal-oriented, systematic cluster-
ing of individual securities and generation of leaf basis portfolios under
the MVE framework. Hoberg and Welch (2009) propose constructing
actors and test assets by optimizing objective functions instead of
orting. For unsupervised clustering, Ahn et al. (2009) model within-
nd between-group return correlations to form portfolio groups, Chen

et al. (2017) evaluate the performance by grouping hedge fund alpha
alues, and Patton and Weller (2022) group assets based on their
eterogeneous risk premia on risk factors. We join Cong et al. (2023)
s the earliest studies that iteratively cluster panel data by maximizing
pecific economic objectives.

Our latent factor model is related to but different from the recent
egularized portfolio (or SDF) literature (e.g., Ao et al., 2019; Kozak

et al., 2020; Bryzgalova et al., 2023), which typically estimate their
regularized portfolio (or SDF) on a large number of prespecified test
assets. In contrast, the SDF and test assets are generated iteratively
in our unified P-Tree framework by maximizing the Sharpe ratio.

5 There is a gap between the in- and out-of-sample Sharpe ratios. The
aragraph ‘‘limits to learning’’ in Internet Appendix I, ‘‘Simulation’’, provides
ore discussion on this gap.
6 P-Trees allow the long and short legs of a long-short portfolio to interact

with different characteristics, thereby loading the portfolio on different leaf
basis portfolios. This asymmetric interactive sorting contrasts with the tradi-
tional treatment of a long-short portfolio as a single asset and complements the
ioneering work of Jarrow et al. (2023) in modeling the two legs of anomaly

portfolios separately.
3 
Notably, Bryzgalova et al. (2023) shrink useless assets when estimating
he optimal portfolio and describe this process as pruning or regular-

izing a decision tree (instead of growing it) working from potential
leaf portfolios. They highlight the resemblance between the decision
ree and security sorting but do not specify a split criterion for tree
rowth. Their paper manually specifies a small set of split candidates
nd a shallow depth for initial trees. P-Trees differ by growing the
ree from the root to provide a goal-oriented clustering approach and
fficiently scanning the large space of generalized sequential sorting on
igh-dimensional characteristics.

Moreover, our study contributes to the growing literature on latent
factor models in asset pricing. For recent developments of PCA, in
addition to the projected PCA (Kim et al., 2021) and reduced-rank
approach (He et al., 2023), the instrumental PCA (IPCA, Kelly et al.,
2019) uses characteristics to model the time-varying factor loadings
nd estimate principal components, and the risk premia PCA (RPPCA,

Lettau and Pelger, 2020) adds asset pricing regularization in the ob-
jective. Recent studies, such as the auto-encoder (Gu et al., 2021),
enerative adversarial network (Chen et al., 2024), characteristics-

sorted factor approximation (Feng et al., 2023, 2024), and structural
neural network (Fan et al., 2022), have also developed customized deep
learning models for nonlinear latent factor modeling. Following these
developments, P-Trees provide a graphical representation for variable
nonlinearity and asymmetric interactions, which PCA or deep learning
methods do not offer.

While ML and tree-based methods are widely adopted in finance
due to their powerful nonlinear modeling capabilities using high-
dimensional characteristics (e.g., Gu et al., 2020; Bianchi et al., 2021;
Bali et al., 2023), most studies either apply off-the-shelf ML models
or prediction without considering the panel data structure or incor-

porating economic guidance, or focus on supervised or unsupervised
earning and prediction tasks. We add to several recent exceptions

involving generative models, including (Cong et al., 2023), which
combines Bayesian spike-and-slab priors and Panel Trees for asset
pricing with uncommon factors, Cong et al. (2021), which develops
the first ‘‘large’’ model in finance for portfolio management using
einforcement learning, Creal and Kim (2023), which adapts Bayesian

trees to currency returns, and Cong et al. (2024), which studies hetero-
eneity in return predictability and links that to trading profitability of

a predictability-based anomaly.
The P-Tree framework has a notable extension, the random P-Forest,

hich connects to recent discussions on ‘‘benign overfitting’’ and ‘‘high-
imensional interpolation’’ (e.g., Belkin et al., 2019; Hastie et al., 2022)

in statistics, as well as the corresponding ‘‘virtue of complexity’’ in
financial contexts (e.g., Kelly et al., 2022, 2024; Didisheim et al.,
2024). We corroborate these studies by showing that large tree-based
models for which the number of parameters exceeds the number of
observations perform well OOS, provided that appropriate statistical
regularization is applied. Moreover, we contribute to recent research
that supports incorporating economic restrictions when estimating and
evaluating machine learning or factor models (e.g., Gagliardini et al.,
2016; Avramov et al., 2023; Jensen et al., 2024).

Finally, our tree-based greedy algorithm demonstrates human-like
intelligence through a ‘‘divide-and-conquer’’ strategy, offering a sparse,
interpretable, and computationally efficient modeling alternative to
modern AI, distinct from deep reinforcement learning.

The remainder of the article is as follows: Section 2 introduces the P-
Tree models. Section 3 illustrates the empirical applications of a single
P-Tree to split the cross-section and generate test assets. Section 4
demonstrates the empirical results of the boosted and multi-factor P-
Trees. Section 5 discusses the random P-Forest and P-Tree’s robustness
to macro regimes. Section 6 concludes, and the internet appendix
includes simulation and additional empirical discussions.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

a

m

s

m
o
t
S
d
d
t
C
r
c

t
{

e
e
a
s
t
t

a
r

w

f
o
o
s

f

Fig. 1. Example of a decision tree.
Left: A decision tree has two splits, three leaf nodes, and three leaf parameters. Right: The corresponding partition plot is generated for the sample of predictor space on value
nd size.
p

i

a
b
b

f
[

t
𝐑
b
a
f

t
T

2. Panel tree for asset pricing

Section 2.1 describes how P-Tree innovates over standard tree-based
odels. Section 2.2 delves into the growth of P-Trees, and Section 2.3

introduces boosted P-Trees for multi-factor models. Section 2.4 presents
imulation results.

2.1. CART and P-Tree innovations

Designed for predictions, the standard CART (Breiman et al., 1984)
odel and its variants partition the predictor space into distinct, non-

verlapping regions of leaf nodes and assign a constant leaf parame-
er to each region.7 It searches and records the partition as follows:
uppose the data constitute 𝐾 predictors, and the 𝑖th observation is
enoted by 𝐳𝑖 = (𝑧𝑖,1,… , 𝑧𝑖,𝐾 ). The 𝑗th split rule of the decision tree is
enoted by 𝐜̃(𝑗) = (𝑧⋅,𝑘, 𝑐𝑗 ), which partitions data by checking whether
he value of the 𝑘th predictor 𝑧⋅,𝑘 is greater or smaller than cutoff 𝑐𝑗 .
ART considers only binary splits, since any multiway-split tree can be
epresented as one with multiple binary splits. The optimal split rule is
hosen to minimize the prediction error.

After 𝐽 splits, CART partitions the predictor space into 𝐽 + 1
leaf nodes denoted by {𝑛}𝐽+1𝑛=1 and assigns a constant leaf parame-
er 𝜇𝑛 to each node. The regression tree  , with parameters 𝛩𝐽 =
{𝐜̃(𝑗)}𝐽𝑗=1, {𝜇𝑛}

𝐽+1
𝑛=1 }, constitutes a high-dimensional step function:

𝐽+1
∑

 (𝐳𝑖 ∣ 𝛩𝐽 ) 
{ }

= 𝜇𝑛I 𝐳𝑖 ∈ 𝑗 . (1)
𝑛=1

The indicator I{𝐳𝑖 ∈ 𝑗} takes 1 for one leaf node and 0 for oth-
rs. The leaf parameters in the step function are estimated by av-
raging the training data within each leaf node. This nonparametric
pproach adapts CART to low signal-to-noise environments and small
ample sizes. The tree model predicts new observations by locating
he corresponding leaf and using its parameter as the prediction after
raining.

Fig. 1 illustrates how conventional tree-based models (e.g., CART)
re applied to predict stock returns with firm characteristics, through
ecursively partitioning the characteristic space into clusters (small-cap,

large-cap growth, and large-cap value). The bottom nodes, often called
leaf nodes, are associated with constant leaf parameters, meaning assets

ithin the same node share the same return forecast.
However, due to multiple limitations, these methods are unsuitable

or economic or financial panel data and for generating test assets
r pricing kernels. First, they treat the panel of asset returns as i.i.d
bservations. Second, they focus on predictions using statistical local
plit criteria, such as minimizing the sum of squared error objectives

7 CART is a binary decision tree model and serves as the foundation
or ensemble methods such as random forest (Breiman, 2001) and boosting

trees (Freund and Schapire, 1997). Other notable Bayesian tree models include
BART (Chipman et al., 2010) and XBART (He et al., 2019; He and Hahn, 2023).
 n

4 
in the child nodes of a particular split. Thus, they do not incorporate
anel structure or economic restrictions. As the tree grows, the number

of observations in each node decreases, and idiosyncratic noise causes
overfitting. While tree ensembles help mitigate overfitting, they are less
nterpretable than a single decision tree.

P-Tree addresses both issues by (i) utilizing a time-invariant tree
structure and (ii) employing economic objectives that consider all
observations, rather than just those in a parent node, to guide the
tree growth. This (i) enables thorough extraction of panel data to
construct leaf basis portfolios and (ii) iteratively builds P-Trees using
global split criteria to prevent overfitting, extending the scope of trees
from pure prediction to goal-oriented clustering for test asset and factor
generation.

2.2. Growing a P-Tree
P-Tree partitions the universe of individual assets into

non-overlapping leaf nodes based on the values of ranked character-
istics with a time-invariant structure over 𝑇 periods. The leaf basis
portfolios are (value-weighted) portfolios of stocks within each leaf
node from the time-invariant tree structure. P-Tree splits sequentially
from the root node and generates one extra leaf basis portfolio after
each additional split. Specifically, it produces 𝑗 + 1 leaf basis portfolios
after the 𝑗th split, reducing the dimension from thousands of individual
assets to 𝑗 + 1 portfolios. These characteristics-managed leaf basis
portfolios expand on characteristics-sorted portfolios to accommodate
asymmetric interactions of multiple characteristics.

Let 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡 denote all excess return vectors of leaf basis portfolios

fter the 𝑗th split of the tree, and let 𝑓 (𝑗)
𝑡 denote the factor spanned

y 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡 . The tree has 𝑗 + 1 basis portfolios in all leaf nodes, denoted

y 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡 = [𝑅(𝑗)

1,𝑡 ,… , 𝑅(𝑗)
𝑛,𝑡 ,… , 𝑅(𝑗)

𝑗+1,𝑡], where 𝑅(𝑗)
𝑛,𝑡 represents a length-𝑇

vector of returns over 𝑇 periods for the 𝑛th leaf node. To find the
irst split, we begin with a portfolio of all assets, denoted as 𝐑(0)

𝑡 =
]

𝑅(0)
𝑡 , which serves as the root node for P-Tree. The tree is expanded

{ }

hrough iterative updates of 𝐑(𝑗)
𝑡 , 𝑓 (𝑗)

𝑡 . First, the leaf basis portfolios
(𝑗)
𝑡 are expanded as the tree grows. Second, using the expanded leaf
asis portfolios, we re-estimate the P-Tree factor 𝑓 (𝑗)

𝑡 . Being a greedy
lgorithm, the sequential growth of the tree ensures computational
easibility compared to a full enumeration of possible sortings.
First split. The root node contains all assets corresponding to the value-
weighted market factor. Firm characteristics are uniformly normalized
cross-sectionally to the range of [−1, 1] within each period. We assess
different split threshold options 𝑐𝑚 for characteristics 𝑧⋅,𝑘, such as
quintile splits 𝑐𝑚 ∈ [−0.6,−0.2, 0.2, 0.6].8 Consider a candidate split

8 Quintile splitting efficiently reduces the search space with only about four
housand stocks and many highly correlated characteristics for growing a P-
ree with 10 leaves. Decile or denser splitting may lead to overfitting and
on-diversified test assets due to some portfolios having few stocks.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

i
u

T
c
p g

o

l

M
a
e

r

m
a
s
s
s
f

r
a

a

f
t
e
P
t

b

w

s
w

Fig. 2. Illustration of the first split.
o determine the optimal characteristic and cutpoint value, we evaluate a list of
andidate splits (i.e., standardized unexpected quarterly earnings (SUE) ≤ −0.2; 40%
ercentile) for calculating the split criterion value.

𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚 = (𝑧⋅,𝑘, 𝑐𝑚) as in Fig. 2. The candidate partitions the root node into
eft and right child nodes based on whether 𝑧⋅,𝑘 is less than or equal to
𝑐𝑚.

The observations of stock returns within each potential child leaf
form a leaf basis portfolio, with vectors of return 𝑅(1)

1,𝑡 and 𝑅(1)
2,𝑡 , re-

spectively. Note they are vectors of returns, thus maintaining the panel
structure of asset returns. The P-Tree factor is estimated as the MVE
portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios,
𝑓 (1)
𝑡 = 𝐰(1)′𝐑(1)

𝑡 , 𝐰(1) ∝ 𝐸̂[𝐑(1)
𝑡 𝐑(1)′

𝑡 ]−1𝐸̂[𝐑(1)
𝑡 ], (2)

[ ]

where 𝐑(1)
𝑡 = 𝑅(1)

1,𝑡 , 𝑅
(1)
2,𝑡 is the matrix of returns of two leaf basis

portfolios after the first split, 𝐸̂[𝐑(1)] and 𝐸̂[𝐑(1)
𝑡 𝐑(1)′

𝑡 ] are the sample
mean and second moment matrix of leaf basis portfolios.9 Generating
latent factors aligns with the P-Tree split criteria, as the P-Tree factor
epresents the MVE portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios.

In the baseline specification, our split criterion therefore aims to
aximize the Sharpe ratio of the MVE portfolio:

√

(𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚) = 𝝁̂′
𝐅𝜮̂

−1
𝐅 𝝁̂𝐅, (4)

where 𝐅 = 𝑓 (1)
𝑡 is the generated latent factor, with the sample mean 𝝁̂𝐹

and covariance matrix 𝜮̂𝐅. The criterion allows P-Tree to construct and
estimate basis portfolios, latent factors, and efficient portfolio weights
simultaneously, for the global objective of constructing the efficient
frontier.

Each candidate split 𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚 generates a different partition of the data,
esulting in unique leaf basis portfolios, corresponding P-Tree factors,
nd ultimately, varying valuations of the split criteria in (4). Con-

sequently, we loop over all candidate splits and select the one that
maximizes the split criteria as our initial split rule.
Second split. The second split can occur at the root’s left or right child
node. We assess the split criteria for all candidate splits for both leaf
nodes and choose the split that maximize the criteria as in (4). Fig. 3
depicts the tree of the candidates for the second split. In either scenario,
one leaf node splits, becoming an internal node and generating two new
leaf nodes. The P-Tree factor is then constructed based on all three leaf
asis portfolios (thus global):

𝑓 (2)
𝑡 = 𝐰(2)′𝐑(2)

𝑡 , 𝐰(2) ∝ 𝐸̂[𝐑(2)
𝑡 𝐑(2)′

𝑡 ]−1𝐸̂[𝐑(2)
𝑡 ], (5)

where 𝐸̂[𝐑(2)] and 𝐸̂[𝐑(2)
𝑡 𝐑(2)′

𝑡 ] are the sample mean and second moment
[ ]

matrix of leaf basis portfolios 𝐑(2)
𝑡 = 𝑅(2)

1,𝑡 , 𝑅
(2)
2,𝑡 , 𝑅

(2)
3,𝑡 after the second

9 Portfolio weights 𝐰(𝑗) are normalized such that the sum of absolute
eights equals one. Following the regularization approaches in Kozak et al.

(2020), Bryzgalova et al. (2023), Didisheim et al. (2024), we utilize small
hrinkage parameters, 𝛾 = 10−4, for robustly estimating efficient portfolio
eights:

( ) 1
𝐰(𝑗) = 𝐸̂[𝐑(𝑗)

𝑡 𝐑(𝑗)′ −
𝑡 ] + 𝛾𝐈 𝐸̂[𝐑(𝑗)

𝑘+1 𝑡 ], (3)
where 𝐈𝑘+1 is the identity matrix. Shrinkage parameters stabilize portfolio
weight estimation and prevent over-leveraging, which can be adjusted to
control the degree of regularization.
5 
split. The construction of the three basis portfolios depends on which
node the candidate splits, as shown in Fig. 3. The updated P-Tree factor
s plugged in to maximize the Sharpe ratio in (4), where 𝐅 = 𝑓 (2)

𝑡 is the
pdated P-Tree factor.

Notably, our proposed objective is a global split criterion, because
it considers all leaf basis portfolios when constructing 𝐅 (the global
MVE portfolio). Unlike CART, which focuses on a specific leaf node,
our model explores all candidate splits in all leaf nodes to find the one
with the largest investment improvement.

Growth termination. All subsequent splits proceed similarly. The tree-
rowing procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1. Determining the number

of leaves is a natural turning point in tree growth, and it is also the
nly tuning parameter needed for P-Tree. We consider P-Trees with

𝐽 + 1 = 10 leaf nodes in the baseline specification. Furthermore, we
mandate a minimum leaf size of 20 for growing the tree because the
leaf needs to serve as a basis portfolio, and any leaves that do not
meet this criterion are not subjected to further splitting. Once the tree
growing process terminates, it outputs the P-Tree split sequence, leaf
basis portfolios 𝐑(𝐽 )

𝑡 = [𝑅(𝐽 )
1,𝑡 ,… , 𝑅(𝐽 )

𝐽+1,𝑡], and the P-Tree factor 𝑓 (𝐽 )
𝑡 . Note

each leaf portfolio can be interpreted through economic fundamentals
revealed by the sequential splits.

Possible extensions. The P-Tree framework is flexible to accommodate
alternative objectives to the global split criteria in (4) for estimating the

VE portfolio using individual asset returns. For example, one might
im to create the minimum-variance portfolio or develop latent factors
xplaining test assets, such as individual or basis portfolio returns.

The crucial aspect is defining a clear economic goal and utilizing
the greedy growth algorithm within trees to explore the extensive
observation clustering space and optimize the objective. P-Trees also
llow for flexible greediness, enabling the consideration of multiple
plits in each iteration instead of the conventional single split, or
imultaneous splits along multiple characteristics by partitioning along
ome linear combinations of the characteristics. We leave these for
uture exploration.

2.3. Boosted P-Trees

Boosting is an ML technique that combines weak learners to form
 strong learner (e.g., Freund and Schapire, 1997; Rossi and Timmer-

mann, 2015; Capponi and Yu, 2024). Boosted P-Trees sequentially grow
a list of additive trees that augment previous trees under the MVE
ramework, which helps further span the efficient frontier with addi-
ional basis portfolios and generate multi-factor models. Considering
xisting factors, the boosting procedure seamlessly integrates into the
-Tree framework by creating additional P-Tree factors to maximize
he collective Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio. The boosting

procedure is outlined below.

1. The initial factor, denoted as 𝑓1,𝑡, can be either generated by the
first single P-Tree or benchmark factors selected by researchers
(e.g., the market factor).

2. The second factor 𝑓2,𝑡 is generated by the second P-Tree to
complement the first factor. The second tree growth follows the
split criterion in (4), but 𝐅 = [𝑓1,𝑡, 𝑓2,𝑡]. The MVE portfolio is
generated directly from all the factors.10

3. Repeat Step 2 to sequentially generate 𝑃 factors 𝐅𝑡 = [𝑓1,𝑡,… ,
𝑓𝑃 ,𝑡] until the stopping criteria are triggered.

10 We use a small shrinkage parameter, 𝛾𝑓 = 10−5, for estimating MVE
portfolio weights on factors.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

T

u
f
T
t
A

r
n
p
s
h
e
e

i

Fig. 3. Illustration of the second split.
here are two potential candidates for the second split, each splitting one of the original leaf nodes. After the second split, three leaf basis portfolios are produced to update the

latent factor.
t

t

p
a
o
m

t
c
m

S
r

o

Block structure in boosted P-Trees. The boosted P-Tree utilizes a two-
step process to produce either the MVE portfolio or the SDF by incor-
porating multiple sets of leaf basis portfolios. Initially, the tree-specific
MVE portfolio of all leaf basis portfolios within each P-Tree is computed
to determine the current P-Tree factor. Subsequently, this factor is
merged with all previous P-Tree factors or benchmarks to create an all-
tree MVE portfolio for the multi-factor P-Tree model. Boosted P-Trees
indirectly impose regularization on the all-tree MVE portfolio weights
through the sequential tree block structure, even though the resulting
Sharpe ratio may not surpass the one generated directly from all basis
portfolios in all P-Trees. This avoids high-dimensional estimation issues
and, in turn, leads to robust estimation and OOS performance.

2.4. Simulation

Simulation exercises in this section highlight the importance of
sing out-of-sample tests and of including most available observable
eatures when applying P-Tree, as well as demonstrate the ability of P-
ree to capture true underlying characteristics generating the data and
heir non-linear interactions. For more details, please refer to Internet
ppendix I.

We introduce three true underlying characteristics, their interac-
tions, and nonlinear terms (detailed in Internet Appendix I). We cal-
ibrate the return-generating process on historical data (introduced in
the next section) and include a large set of redundant characteristics
correlated with the true characteristics generating the data, but do not
drive returns. We then conduct the following four sets of exercises.

First, we compare the Sharpe ratios and alphas of P-Tree test
assets with conventional characteristics-sorted portfolios, which do not
incorporate characteristic interactions. The single P-Tree and boosted
P-Trees consistently produce leaf basis portfolios with higher Sharpe
atios and larger unexplained pricing errors under various signal-to-
oise-ratio levels, both in- and out-of-sample. Even when sorting is
erformed on the true characteristics directly, univariate- and bivariate-
orted portfolios still underperform P-Tree test assets generated on
igh-dimensional characteristics. This result is corroborated later in our
mpirical findings that P-Tree test assets achieve better mean–variance
fficiency than sorted portfolios (Section 4.2). P-Tree indeed captures

important interactions in the data-generating process.
Second, the interpretability of one P-Tree or a few P-Trees relies

on their ability to select variables that matter. P-Tree helps distinguish
sparse characteristics underlying the true data generation from a large
number of redundant or useless ones. With repeated simulations, P-
Tree selects the true characteristics in the first few splits with high
probabilities. These improved selection rates are particularly evident
n scenarios with a high signal-to-noise ratio. This discovery can only
 c

6 
be discerned through simulations, as real-world data’s sparse charac-
eristics are still unknown. The consistent selection behavior relates to

assessing characteristic importance in Section 5.1.
Third, we break down the difference between the in- and out-of-

sample performance of P-Tree models into two components: overfitting
and limits to learning, as discussed by Didisheim et al. (2024). Estimating
he true predictability is challenging in real data due to the unknown

market data-generating process. In our simulation, however, the true
predictability is defined as the OOS Sharpe ratio achieved by P-Trees
with oracle characteristics. We find positive values for overfitting and
limits to learning, which increase with more boosted P-Trees, sup-
porting the conclusion in Didisheim et al. (2024) that overfitting and
limits to learning become more problematic with additional model
arameters and a limited number of observations. Later in empirical
nalyses, we observe again the large gap between the in- and out-
f-sample performance of P-Tree models, justifying our focus on OOS
etrics.

Fourth, we evaluate the efficiency loss when a P-Tree misses some
rue characteristics among input features (but redundant or useless
haracteristics abound). This exercise evaluates the model’s perfor-
ance with incomplete or useless information, which may occur for

various reasons. Under our calibrated return-generating process, the
harpe ratios and CAPM alphas decline substantially, and P-Tree selects
edundant or useless characteristics more frequently. Therefore, we

should include all available predictors. In our later analyses of historical
data, we indeed use all firm characteristics available in the dataset.

3. Splitting the cross section of U.S. equities
The P-Tree framework easily applies to public equities or corporate

bonds. We focus on U.S. equities for an illustrative application. No-
tably, against the backdrop of emergent large models, P-Tree offers an
interpretable alternative that does not require excessive computation
resources.11

3.1. Data on U.S. public equities
Equity data and characteristics. The standard filters (e.g., same as in
Fama–French factor construction) are applied to the universe of U.S.
equities. This universe includes only stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, or
NASDAQ for more than one year and uses those observations for firms
with a CRSP share code of 10 or 11. We exclude stocks with negative

11 The baseline single P-Tree model trained on U.S. data runs about 20 min
n a server with an Intel Xeon Gold 6230 CPU, for a training dataset with 61
haracteristics and 2.2 million observations.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

f
2
–

m
s
[
n
m

l
a

t

a
m v
m c
i p
r c

o
m

i
o
a

Table 1
Equity characteristics.
This table lists the description of 61 characteristics used in the empirical study.

No. Char. Description Category
1 ABR Abnormal returns around earnings announ. Momentum
2 ACC Operating accruals Investment
3 ADM Advertising expense-to-market Intangibles
4 AGR Asset growth Investment
5 ALM Quarterly asset liquidity Intangibles
6 ATO Asset turnover Profitability
7 BASPREAD Bid–ask spread (3 months) Frictions
8 BETA Beta (3 months) Frictions
9 BM Book-to-market equity Value-versus-growth
10 BM_IA Industry-adjusted book to market Value-versus-growth
11 CASH Cash holdings Value-versus-growth
12 CASHDEBT Cash to debt Value-versus-growth
13 CFP Cashflow-to-price Value-versus-growth
14 CHCSHO Change in shares outstanding Investment
15 CHPM Change in Profit margin Profitability
16 CHTX Change in tax expense Momentum
17 CINVEST Corporate investment Investment
18 DEPR Depreciation/PP&E Momentum
19 DOLVOL Dollar trading volume Frictions
20 DY Dividend yield Value-versus-growth
21 EP Earnings-to-price Value-versus-growth
22 GMA Gross profitability Investment
23 GRLTNOA Growth in long-term net operating assets Investment
24 HERF Industry sales concentration Intangibles
25 HIRE Employee growth rate Intangibles
26 ILL Illiquidity rolling (3 months) Frictions
27 LEV Leverage Value-versus-growth
28 LGR Growth in long-term debt Investment
29 MAXRET Maximum daily returns (3 months) Frictions
30 ME Market equity Frictions
31 ME_IA Industry-adjusted size Frictions
32 MOM12M Cumulative returns in the past (2-12) months Momentum
33 MOM1M Previous month return Momentum
34 MOM36M Cumulative returns in the past (13-35) months Momentum
35 MOM60M Cumulative returns in the past (13-60) months Momentum
36 MOM6M Cumulative returns in the past (2-6) months Momentum
37 NI Net equity issue Investment
38 NINCR Number of earnings increases Momentum
39 NOA Net operating assets Investment
40 OP Operating profitability Profitability
41 PCTACC Percent operating accruals Investment
42 PM Profit margin Profitability
43 PS Performance Score Profitability
44 RD_SALE R&D-to-sales Intangibles
45 RDM R&D-to-market Intangibles
46 RE Revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts Intangibles
47 RNA Return on net operating assets Profitability
48 ROA Return on assets Profitability
49 ROE Return on equity Profitability
50 RSUP Revenue surprise Momentum
51 RVAR_CAPM Idiosyncratic volatility - CAPM (3 months) Frictions
52 RVAR_FF3 Res. var. - Fama–French 3 factors (3 months) Frictions
53 SVAR Return variance (3 months) Frictions
54 SEAS1A 1-Year Seasonality Intangibles
55 SGR Sales growth Value-versus-growth
56 SP Sales-to-price Value-versus-growth
57 STD_DOLVOL Std of dollar trading volume (3 months) Frictions
58 STD_TURN Std. of Share turnover (3 months) Frictions
59 SUE Standardized unexpected quarterly earnings Momentum
60 TURN Shares turnover Frictions
61 ZEROTRADE Number of zero-trading days (3 months) Frictions

book equity or lag market equity. We use 61 firm characteristics with
onthly observations for each stock, covering six major categories:
omentum, value, investment, profitability, frictions (or size), and

ntangibles. Characteristics are standardized cross-sectionally to the
ange [−1, 1]. Table 1 lists these input variables.12

The monthly data ranges from 1981 to 2020. The average and
edian monthly stock observations are 5265 and 4925 for the first

12 For example, market equity values in Dec. 2020 are uniformly standard-
zed into [−1, 1]. The firm with the lowest value is -1, and the highest is 1. All
thers are distributed uniformly in between. Missing values of characteristics
re imputed as 0, which implies the firm is neutral in the security sorting.
7 
Table 2
Macroeconomic variables.
This table lists the description of macro variables used in the empirical study.

No. Variable name Description
1 DFY Default yield
2 DY Dividend yield of S&P 500
3 EP Earnings-to-price of S&P 500
4 ILL Pastor-Stambaugh illiquidity
5 INFL Inflation
6 LEV Leverage of S&P 500
7 NI Net equity issuance of S&P 500
8 SMVAR Stock Market (S&P 500) Volatility
9 TBL Three-month treasury bill rate
10 TMS Term spread

20 years, and 4110 and 3837 for the latter 20 years. We apply cross-
sectional winsorization at 1% and 99% to mitigate the impact of
outliers on individual stock returns. The entire 40-year sample is used
or benchmark analysis. The sample is split into two parts – the first
0 years from 1981 to 2000 and the recent 20 years from 2001 to 2020
 for a subsample robustness check and as training and test samples.
Macroeconomic variables. In addition, we use 10 macro variables to
capture potential regime switches. Table 2 summarizes the macro
variables, which include market timing macro predictors, bond market
predictors, and aggregate characteristics for S&P 500. We standardize
these macro predictor data by the historical percentile numbers for
the past 10 years.13 This rolling-window data standardization is useful
when comparing the predictor level to detect different macroeconomic
regimes.

3.2. Visualizing a single P-Tree

Fig. 4 plots the P-Tree diagram. In each leaf node, S# represents
the order of sequential splits, and N# is the node index. We pro-
vide the numbers in the terminal leaves for the portfolio size: the

onthly median number of stock observations. The split rules are the
elected splitting characteristics and cross-sectional quintile cutpoints
−0.6,−0.2, 0.2, 0.6]. Before the first split, the tree grows from the root
ode (N1), whose leaf basis portfolio represents the value-weighted
arket portfolio.

The data-driven P-Tree first splits along the standardized unex-
pected quarterly earnings (SUE, Rendleman et al., 1982) at −0.2 (40%
percentile). After this split, 40% of the stocks go to the left leaf (labeled
N2), and 60% go to the right (N3). Then, the second split is on the
dollar trading volume (DOLVOL, Chordia et al., 2001) at −0.6 of the
right leaf (N3), and the third split is also on DOLVOL at −0.6 of the
eft leaf (N2). Furthermore, subsequent splits include the industry-
djusted book-to-market ratio (BM_IA), return-on-equity (ROA), zero

trade (ZEROTRADE), and market equity (ME). After nine splits, we stop
he P-Tree growth and obtain 10 leaf basis portfolios.
Clustering patterns and asymmetric interactions. P-Tree clusters similar
ssets based on underlying characteristics, revealing sources of mean–
ariance diversification. Fig. 4 shows the (asymmetric) interactions of
haracteristics for splitting the cross section. By jointly defining the
artition corresponding to the leaf node, P-Tree learns the interaction of
haracteristics appearing in the same path. For instance, ZEROTRADE
f liquidity (Liu, 2006) is a valuable indicator for further splitting

low-SUE low-DOLVOL stocks. However, for low-SUE non-low-DOLVOL
stocks, ME of size (Banz, 1981) might be a better indicator for a further
split under the MVE framework.

13 For example, inflation greater than 0.7 implies the current inflation level
is higher than 70% of observations during the past decade.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

Fig. 4. Panel tree from 1981 to 2020.
We provide splitting characteristics, cutpoint values for each parent node, and their respective node and splitting indexes. For example, node N1 is split by SUE at -0.2 (40%
percentile) as the first split S1, and the second split S2 is on node N3 by DOLVOL at -0.6 (20% percentile). The median monthly number of assets in the terminal leaf basis
portfolios is also included. For example, node N8 has 134 stocks by monthly median. Table 1 describes equity characteristics. Fig. A.1 reports the P-Tree diagrams for subsamples.

Fig. 5. Visualizing nonlinear interactions with partition plots.
This diagram illustrates the partitions for the first few splits of the tree structure in Fig. 4. The first split (S1) occurs at 40% of SUE on the entire stock universe, and the second
split occurs at 80% of DOLVOL on the high SUE partition. The portfolio results for each partition are provided (monthly average excess returns (AVG) and annualized Sharpe
ratios (SR)). The arrows indicate the next split is implemented on the partitioned area from the previous one.

8 



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

c
i

t
t
e
t
i
D

s
o
s
c
N

w
S
h
e
e
c
a
i
s
-
r
s

U
r
T
h

a
w

P

c i
f
e
‘

i
h
C
h
B
s

u
C m
o
Q c

i
o

t

The current literature has recognized interactions between two
haracteristics, but a more systematic investigation is needed. For
nstance, Lee and Swaminathan (2000) enhance momentum strategies

by interacting with trading volume, and Da et al. (2014) find that
he momentum effect is stronger for firms with continuous informa-
ion than firms with discrete information. Our framework allows for
xploring interactions among multiple characteristics, going beyond
he typical bivariate relations. This is demonstrated in Fig. 4, where
nteraction paths involving at least four characteristics, such as SUE,
OLVOL, ME, and ZEROTRADE, can be identified.

The partition plot in Fig. 5 is an alternative way to visualize the
clustering and asymmetric patterns. We report each leaf’s monthly
average excess returns and annualized Sharpe ratios. First, P-Tree splits
n SUE at −0.2, which yields a low-SUE portfolio including 40% of the
tocks and a high-SUE portfolio constituted by 60% of the stocks in the
ross section. The spread of monthly expected returns between N2 and
3 is 0.46%, and the Sharpe ratios range from 0.25 to 0.64.

Second, we split on DOLVOL at −0.6 on N3 to harvest N6 and N7,
here the low-DOLVOL portfolio N6 has higher expected returns and
harpe ratio than N7. Third, we split on DOLVOL at −0.6 on N2 to
arvest N4 and N5, where the low-DOLVOL portfolio N4 has lower
xpected returns and Sharpe ratio than N5. We find DOLVOL has differ-
nt impacts on N2 and N3. On the high-SUE side, DOLVOL positively
orrelates to asset returns. However, on the low-SUE side, DOLVOL neg-
tively correlates with asset returns. This is an example of asymmetric
nteraction between SUE and DOLVOL. A simple trading strategy that
horts N4 (Low-SUE -Low-DOLVOL portfolio) and longs N6 (High-SUE
 Low-DOLVOL portfolio) makes over 2% monthly expected return. The
eturn gaps among the leaves show the usefulness of splitting the cross
ection via the asymmetric interaction of characteristics.

3.3. P-Tree leaf basis portfolios

Asset clustering. P-Tree generates leaves, a.k.a., leaf basis portfolios.
nlike the scalar output in CART for pure prediction, a leaf of P-Tree

epresents a time series of portfolio returns from a time-invariant P-
ree structure. These leaf basis portfolios are nonlinear, interactive, and
igh-dimensional characteristics-managed portfolios. Table 3, panel A,

summarizes leaf basis portfolios generated by the first P-Tree in Fig. 4:
the index of nodes, median number of stocks in the leaf basis portfolio,
verage returns, CAPM 𝛼 (%), 𝛽, time series regression 𝑅2, and alphas
ith respect to FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models (Fama

and French, 2015; Hou et al., 2021; Kelly et al., 2019; Lettau and
elger, 2020).

We observe two large leaves: N11 containing 900 stocks and N15
ontaining over 1700 stocks by monthly median. Their CAPM 𝑅2 are

over 90%, and the 𝛽 are close to one, meaning their return time series
are highly correlated with the market returns. No further splitting
results in higher Sharpe ratios on these two leaves, yet other leaves
offer higher investment improvement under the MVE framework. For
nstance, N21 represents the low-SUE, high-DOLVOL, low-ME, and
igh-ZEROTRADE leaf, which has −1.14% average return and −1.83%
APM 𝛼, and N27 is the high-SUE, low-DOLVOL, high-BM_IA, and
igh-ROA leaf, which has 2.46% average returns and 1.97% CAPM 𝛼.
y employing a simple monthly rebalanced strategy of buying N27 and
elling short N21, one can expect an average return of 3.6%.

These leaf basis portfolios are generated via interactive and nonlin-
ear splits on 61 characteristics. We expect them to be very hard to price
sing the prevalent linear factor models. Nine leaves have significant
APM alphas among the 10 leaf basis portfolios. At a confidence level
f 10%, the number of statistically significant non-zero alphas for FF5,
5, RP-PCA 5, and IPCA 5 factor models are 9, 9, 9, and 7, respectively.

P-Tree is a goal-oriented clustering algorithm that maximizes the
Sharpe ratio in the baseline specification. Therefore, we anticipate these
est assets having economically large and statistically significant alphas
 i

9 
against those ‘‘inadequate’’ benchmark factor models. With such dis-
tinct basis portfolios, we expect them to achieve higher mean–variance
efficiency, spanning an efficient frontier that benchmark factor models
fail to span. Panels B and C of Table 3 provide subsample analysis for
the first and the latter 20 years. Although the tree structure and leaf
identity change because of refitting, we still find similar patterns. For
example, pricing these portfolios based on leaf factors remains difficult
using benchmark factor models.

Diversified test assets. Fig. 6, Panel A, depicts the performance statistics
of P-Tree test assets. Subfigure A1 shows the mean-standard-deviation
scatter plot for leaf basis portfolios of the first P-Tree on the 40-year
ample from 1981 to 2020 in black circles. The expected returns are

in the range of −2% to 3%, and the standard deviations are in the
range of 4% to 9%. We observe large variations in these portfolios’
expected returns and risks, which means they are diversified under
the MVE framework. Significant variations exist among the portfolios
in Panels A2 and A3 for subsample analysis, with the earlier sample
showing more diversification and the latter sample being more concen-
trated. By contrast, the 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios in light-red triangles
cluster around the same level of average returns, which are much less
diversified than those of P-Tree test assets. This finding indicates that
P-Tree test assets are more diversified under the MVE framework than
the ME-BM portfolios.

Panel B of Fig. 6 shows the CAPM model-implied alpha-beta plots.
In subfigure B1’s 40-year sample, we find CAPM 𝛽s of P-Tree test assets
are scattered around one in the range of 0.6 to 1.6. CAPM alphas are
around zero, ranging from −2% to 2%. These basis portfolios have a
lot of variations in CAPM alphas and 𝛽s. The alpha and beta ranges
were larger in the first 20 years in B1, whereas the variation was
smaller in the second 20 years in B2. The 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios
are more easily explained for the CAPM model than P-Tree test assets
because they align closely with the vertical line of zero alpha with
more negligible diversification in all figures. In summary, this is highly
positive evidence for P-Tree test assets’ better-diversified patterns than
conventional ones, even when priced by CAPM.

4. Boosted P-Trees for multiple factors and test assets

4.1. Growing the efficient frontier

Our investigation focuses on the efficient frontiers spanned by test
assets generated using (boosted) P-Tree. Many P-Tree test assets have
significant alphas over multiple well-known benchmark factor models,
ndicating those factor models cannot effectively span the efficient
rontier. The boosting technique enhances our ability to generate more
ffective test assets that expand the efficient frontier better, that is,
‘growing the efficient frontiers on P-Trees’’.

Unspanned efficient frontier. Fig. 7 shows the MVE frontiers of P-Trees
and boosted P-Trees in gradient color from blue to red for the sample
period from 1981 to 2020. Benchmark factor models are printed in
black, and benchmark test assets in purple. Notably, the P-Tree1 fron-
tier (generated by the first P-Tree test assets) is already more efficient
than any frontier spanned by the benchmark factor models and test
assets. Among the benchmark test assets, 285 bivariate-sorted portfolios
span a frontier very close to our P-Tree1 frontier. However, P-Tree1
contains only 10 portfolios, much smaller than 285. Among the factor

odels, the IPCA five-factor model is a strong candidate but still less
efficient than the P-Tree1 frontier. Overall, these 10 leaf basis portfolios
onsist of promising test assets to span the efficient frontier, which
s more efficient than the benchmarks under the MVE framework. In
ther words, the listed benchmark factor models and test assets are

nsufficient to span the real efficient frontier.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

T

l

w
a

f
b

c
i

f

a
T
T

Table 3
Evaluation for leaf basis portfolios.

his table reports the properties of 10 leaf basis portfolios generated by the first P-Tree: the median number of stocks (leaf size), average returns, CAPM 𝛼 (%), 𝛽, 𝑅2, and the
alphas (%) with respect to FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models. Panel A corresponds to Fig. 4, and Panels B and C correspond respectively to (a) and (b) in Fig. A.1.

ID # Median AVG STD 𝛼𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀 𝛽𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀 𝑅2
𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀 𝛼𝐹 𝐹5 𝛼𝑄5 𝛼𝑅𝑃5 𝛼𝐼 𝑃5

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
N8 134 −0.40 5.76 −0.97*** 0.84 0.42 −0.91*** −0.66*** −1.51*** −0.58*
N9 210 −0.92*** 4.14 −1.35*** 0.63 0.47 −1.46*** −1.25*** −1.84*** −0.36*
N20 178 −0.34 8.89 −1.34*** 1.45 0.53 −1.10 −0.49* −1.55*** −1.78***
N21 227 −1.14*** 5.90 −1.83*** 1.00 0.58 −1.83*** −1.56*** −2.34*** −1.19***
N11 900 0.36* 4.81 −0.35*** 1.04 0.93 −0.30*** −0.15** −0.29*** 0.16
N12 210 0.94*** 4.63 0.42** 0.76 0.54 0.29** 0.48*** −0.22 1.17***
N26 157 1.77*** 6.04 1.16*** 0.88 0.43 1.08*** 1.37*** 0.40** 1.40***
N27 112 2.46*** 4.55 1.97*** 0.71 0.49 1.80*** 2.00*** 1.18*** 2.18***
N14 658 1.03*** 6.88 0.21 1.18 0.59 0.32* 0.64*** −0.33** 0.06
N15 1768 0.81*** 4.41 0.14*** 0.98 0.98 0.10*** 0.03 −0.26*** 0.29
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
N16 97 0.25 5.99 −0.34 0.81 0.36 −0.27 −0.08 −0.27 −0.02
N17 256 −0.74*** 4.40 −1.16*** 0.57 0.33 −1.36*** −1.17*** −1.56*** −1.47***
N18 95 1.72*** 5.72 1.17*** 0.75 0.34 1.07*** 1.27*** 0.84** 0.03
N19 48 2.91*** 4.97 2.44*** 0.64 0.33 2.13*** 2.50*** 2.36*** 1.87***
N5 3443 0.76*** 4.39 0.03* 0.99 1.00 −0.02* −0.04*** −0.49*** 1.34***
N24 160 −3.53*** 7.75 −4.36*** 1.13 0.42 −3.90*** −3.29*** −3.58*** 0.79
N25 250 −2.82*** 6.85 −3.58*** 1.04 0.45 −3.20*** −2.54*** −1.89*** 1.55*
N13 286 −1.75*** 9.94 −2.86*** 1.52 0.46 −1.58*** −1.19*** −1.29*** 2.22**
N14 217 −1.21* 9.60 −2.21*** 1.37 0.40 −1.16*** −0.63 −0.09 4.52**
N15 116 1.23* 10.07 0.16 1.46 0.41 1.12*** 1.52*** 1.39** 3.58
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
N8 153 −0.20 4.44 −0.63** 0.67 0.45 −0.63** −0.46** −0.93*** −0.10
N18 58 −0.31 6.82 −0.96*** 1.01 0.44 −0.93*** −0.53* −1.36*** −0.88**
N19 112 −0.90*** 4.72 −1.39*** 0.76 0.53 −1.39*** −1.31*** −1.89*** −0.93***
N5 1206 0.35 5.23 −0.38*** 1.13 0.95 −0.27*** −0.25*** −0.21*** 0.37*
N24 171 0.94** 6.47 0.26 1.05 0.53 0.31 0.57** −0.13 0.59**
N25 104 2.44*** 6.80 1.79*** 1.02 0.45 1.88*** 2.17*** 1.16*** 1.43***
N52 47 1.68*** 5.28 1.17*** 0.79 0.46 1.17*** 1.45*** 0.52** 1.56***
N53 76 3.53*** 5.27 2.97*** 0.86 0.54 2.88*** 3.10*** 2.24*** 3.19***
N27 76 1.79*** 4.05 1.36*** 0.66 0.53 1.31*** 1.37*** 0.92*** 1.6***
N7 1896 0.76*** 4.27 0.16*** 0.94 0.98 0.10** 0.09** −0.05 0.63***

*, **, and *** represent significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
a

c

F
𝑡
p

t

i

Boosting the empirical frontier. Beyond the first P-Tree, boosted P-Trees
improve portfolio efficiency from one factor to 20 factors. In Fig. 7, the
spanned frontiers move toward the top left corner of the mean–variance
diagram. Our approach consistently advances the efficient frontier
throughout the 20 P-Trees. Combining 200 assets in one MVE portfolio
is challenging because of the curse of dimensionality. Unlike Ait-Sahalia
and Xiu (2017), who use exogenous industry classifications to construct
block-diagonal patterns, our boosted P-Trees entertain an endogenous
block-diagonal structure in the return covariance. We combine the 10
eaf basis portfolios of each P-Tree into a single P-Tree factor and then

estimate the tangency portfolio of the boosted P-Tree factors. As such,
e can generate multiple factors and combine multiple sets of test
ssets in one frontier under the MVE framework.

Moving from a single P-Tree to 20 P-Trees results in more efficient
rontiers, allowing investors to achieve higher expected returns while
earing the same level of risk. Although a significant difference exists

between the frontiers of P-Tree1 and P-Tree10, the frontier lines in-
rease slowly after P-Tree10, indicating a more negligible improvement
n mean–variance efficiency with each subsequent boosting.

We employ asset pricing tests to demonstrate the incremental ef-
iciency of boosted P-Trees. First, we show the Sharpe ratios of each

boosted P-Tree factor and the multi-factor model. Second, we evaluate
each boosted factor with CAPM and FF5 by checking for a significant
alpha. As we know from Table 3, P-Tree test assets are hard to price,
nd we expect the P-Tree factors to pass the CAPM test and FF5 test.
hird, we regress each P-Tree factor on all the previous boosted P-
ree factors generated for the expanding factor tests. The efficiency
10 
of the frontier increases if the previous P-Tree factors do not span the
dditional P-Tree factor.

The test results are presented in Table 4. The Sharpe ratios of each
boosted factor are above 1, even for the 20-th factor. Meanwhile, the
umulative multi-factor Sharpe ratio increases monotonically from 6

to 15, which means that the test assets of the boosted P-Tree add
incremental pricing information to the existing test assets. Furthermore,
all CAPM and FF5 alphas are positive and highly significant, indicating
that all the boosted P-Tree factors cannot be explained by CAPM or
F5. In the expanding factor test, we find significant alphas, large
-statistics, and high time series 𝑅2. After applying the nested asset
ricing test (Barillas and Shanken, 2017), we do not find any evidence

that supports a sufficient factor model to explain the assets in the
boosted P-Tree test.14 In summary, Table 4 shows that boosted P-Trees
generate unexplained alphas, and their leaf portfolios thus better span
the efficient frontier. By contrast, conventional univariate- or bivariate-
sorted test assets used for testing asset pricing models do not fully cover
he efficient frontier.

4.2. Generating test assets via boosted P-Trees

First, we show the pricing performance of leaf basis portfolios,
mplying they serve as diversified test assets and are challenging against

14 The first row contains ‘‘-’’ signs, which indicate that the expanding factor
and BS tests are not applicable for the single factor case.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

a
𝑅
a
a
c
a
d

t
T
c

T
d
T
a
t

b

Fig. 6. Diversified P-Tree test assets.
This figure reports the performance of P-Tree test assets (presented in Table 3) and the 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios. The 10 black circles represent P-Tree test assets, and the 25
light-red triangles represent ME-BM portfolios. Panel A shows the scatter plots of the mean and standard deviation for portfolio returns in percentage. Panel B shows the scatter
plots of CAPM alpha and beta, with alphas in percentage.
l
w

o
P
a

l
v
t
b
d
o

the FF5 model. Then, we utilize boosted P-Trees that generate multiple
sets of basis portfolios. Empirically, we grow up to 20 P-Trees, yielding
200 leaf basis portfolios.
P-Tree test assets. Table 5, Panel A, lists the number of portfolios, the
GRS test statistic and its 𝑝-value, the 𝑝-value of PY test,15 the average
bsolute 𝛼, the root mean squared 𝛼, the average time series regression
2, and the percentage of significant alphas with respect to 10%, 5%,
nd 1% confidence levels. In the rows, P-Tree1 represents a set of test
ssets comprising 10 leaf basis portfolios in the first P-Tree. P-Tree1-5
ombines all the leaf basis portfolios generated by the first five P-Trees,
nd P-Tree6-10 contains the 6-th to the 10-th P-Trees. Similarly, we
efine P-Tree11-15, P-Tree16-20, and P-Tree1-20.

We find the GRS test and PY test always reject the null hypothesis
hat the alphas of test assets are jointly zero for all specifications of P-
ree test assets, which means the expected returns of P-Tree test assets
an hardly be explained by the FF5 model. Furthermore, the last three

columns show that many assets have statistically significant alphas. For
comparison, we include four sets of test assets that are commonly used
in literature: 150 10 × 1 univariate-sorted portfolios, 285 bivariate-
sorted portfolios, 5 × 5 ME-BM portfolios, and 49 industry portfolios,
all of which can be downloaded from Ken French’s website. P-Tree test
assets have larger GRS test statistics and alphas than these benchmark
test assets.

Furthermore, we observe the decline of alphas from the first P-
ree to the subsequently boosted P-Trees as anticipated, indicating
iminishing marginal convergence to the limit of the efficient frontier.
he test assets of the first P-Tree have larger GRS statistics, higher
verage alphas, and higher proportions of significant alphas than the
est assets generated by the follow-up P-Trees. In addition, we see

15 Pesaran and Yamagata (2023) adapts to cases where the number of assets
eing tested is larger than the number of periods, which Gibbons et al. (1989)

cannot address.
 o

11 
an evident decline in GRS statistics and alphas from P-Tree1-5 to P-
Tree6-10, P-Tree11-15, and P-Tree16-20. P-Tree generates the most
informative test assets in the first P-Tree, whereas the incremental
information in the boosted P-Trees is complementary and declining.
Although the alphas decline along boosting, the test assets generated by
P-Tree16-20 cannot be explained by FF5, with a 4.21 GRS test statistic,
0.31% mean absolute alpha, and 52% test assets having significant
alphas at the 10% level. The test assets of P-Tree16-20 are still harder
to price than univariate- and bivariate-sorted portfolios.

Overall, these 200 test assets created by 20 P-Trees on high-
dimensional characteristics challenge the FF5 model. They are more
difficult to price than benchmark test assets, setting a high standard
for testing factor models, which respond to the concerns in empirical
studies (Lewellen et al., 2010; Ang et al., 2020).

For robustness, Table 5, Panels B and C, report the first and the
atter 20-year subsamples. In the recent 20 years, FF5 has performed
ell in pricing the benchmark test asset; that is, the GRS and PY tests

cannot be rejected at the 10% level, and less significant alphas testing
n 49 industry portfolios and univariate-sorted portfolios. However, the
-Tree test assets always reject the null hypothesis for GRS and PY tests
nd are consistently challenging to price in both subsamples.16

Advantages of P-Tree clustering. P-Tree has two advantages that make
these test assets efficient. First, P-Tree is a goal-oriented clustering
algorithm tailored for spanning the efficient frontier iteratively. Each
eaf clusters individual asset returns based on similar characteristic
alues, aggregating as a time series of portfolio returns. The goal is
o maximize the collective Sharpe ratio of the MVE portfolio spanned
y the leaf basis portfolios. The economic objective of P-Tree is vastly
ifferent from the CART and other off-the-shelf ML models, which focus
n statistical return prediction without economic utilities and cannot

16 The GRS test is not applicable in the presence of more test assets than
bservations, as is the case for Bi-Sort in Panels B and C, marked with ‘‘-’’.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

n
t
b

a
t
a

t
f
b
T
t

Fig. 7. Characterizing the efficient frontier with P-Trees.
This figure shows the MVE frontiers of the first P-Tree, the sequence of boosted P-Tree factor models, benchmark factor models, and benchmark test assets. The dots on the
frontiers represent the tangency portfolios. The mean and standard deviation are on a monthly scale. The sample period is from 1981 to 2020.
𝑅
m
t
u
i
P
a

c

p

ever tackle the task of growing an efficient frontier.
Second, P-Tree exploits the complex asymmetric interactions and

onlinearities on high-dimensional characteristics. The commonly used
est assets are characteristics-sorted portfolios, such as univariate- and
ivariate-sorted portfolios, which only consider decile or quintile sort-

ing, along with up to three characteristics chosen ad hoc or based
on researchers’ domain expertise. In contrast, P-Tree is more flexible,
allowing for general sequential and simultaneous sorting with more
characteristics and asymmetric interactions in a unified framework. P-
Trees enable the inclusion of large leaves, like N15, as shown in Fig. 4,
where further splitting does not result in a higher Sharpe ratio, as well
s small leaves, such as N8. The asymmetric splitting allows P-Trees
o focus on the finer clusters of informative assets while paying less
ttention to non-informative assets under the MVE framework.

4.3. P-Tree factors and asset pricing performance
Using the findings from the previous analysis, we have established

hat P-Tree test assets are distinct from conventional test assets. Moving
orward, we proceed with cross-examining P-Tree factors and various
enchmark factor models on different sets of test assets, including P-
ree leaf basis portfolios. We adopt the cross-sectional 𝑅2 to evaluate
he asset pricing performance:

( )

∑𝑁 ̂̄ 2
𝑖=1 𝑅̄𝑖 − 𝑅𝑖

Cross-sectional 𝑅2 = 1 − , (6)
(

∑𝑁 )2
𝑖=1 𝑅̄𝑖

′
where 𝑅̄𝑖 denotes the average return and 𝑅̂̄𝑖 = 𝜷𝑖 𝝀̃ is the factor
model implied average return of asset 𝑖. The risk premium estimation
adopts the cross-sectional regression estimates of factors, and factor
12 
loadings are estimated from time series regressions. The cross-sectional
2 represents the faction of assets’ average returns explained by the
odel-implied expected returns. Various test assets, including P-Tree

est assets, conventional sorted portfolios, and industry portfolios, are
sed to test the factor models. In Table 6, we display the factor models
n the columns to explain the expected return of test assets in the rows.
anel A provides the asset pricing performances for the 40-year sample,
nd Panels B and C report for the 20-year subsamples.17

First, the P-Tree1 factor (from the first P-Tree) explains 98.3% of
the cross-sectional return variation of the P-Tree1 leaf basis portfolios
(10 assets), whereas the benchmark factor models provide much lower
performance. This finding is not surprising, since the first P-Tree factor
is constructed jointly with these test assets. However, the FF5, Q5, and
RP-PCA five-factor models have much smaller 𝑅2s than the P-Tree1
factor, indicating large pricing errors in explaining the expected returns
of the highly diversified P-Tree1 test assets. One exception is that the
IPCA five-factor model performs well in pricing the P-Tree1 test assets,
with a 73.5% 𝑅2.

Second, the P-Tree five-factor model (P-Tree1-5, read as a model
ontaining from the first to the fifth factors), which includes five P-

Tree factors from the first five P-Trees, demonstrates tremendous asset
ricing performance. It outperforms the benchmark five-factor models

in pricing the first 10 P-Trees’ (P-Tree1-10) test assets and 5 × 5
ME-BM portfolios. For other specifications of test assets, P-Tree1-5
shows comparable levels of cross-sectional 𝑅2 among all the five-factor

17 The first row contains two ‘‘–,’’, which indicate the number of assets
𝑁 = 10 is equal to or smaller than the number of factors (10 or 20). Thus, the
cross-sectional regression is not applicable.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

a

F

Table 4
Testing the boosted P-Tree growth.
This table shows the performance of each sequentially generated boosted P-Tree factor, including the Sharpe ratio, CAPM test, FF5 test, expanding factors test, and the (Barillas
nd Shanken, 2017) test. Panels A, B, and C report for different sample periods. The ‘‘Single’’ column displays the Sharpe ratio of the single factor, and the ‘‘Cumu.’’ (cumulative)

column shows the Sharpe ratio of the MVE spanned by multiple factors from the first to the current P-Tree factors. The columns report the 𝛼 (%) and 𝑡-statistic for CAPM and
F5 spanning regression tests. For the expanding factor tests, we regress each P-Tree factor on all previously boosted P-Tree factors and report the 𝛼 (%), 𝑡-statistic, and 𝑅2.

Sharpe ratio CAPM test FF5 test Expanding factors test BS test
Single Cumu. 𝛼 (%) 𝑡-stat 𝛼 (%) 𝑡-stat 𝛼 (%) 𝑡-stat 𝑅2 𝑝-value

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
1 6.37 6.37 1.39 35.36 1.37 35.81 – – –
2 3.20 7.35 0.52 17.65 0.48 15.27 0.62 9.55 0.01 0.00
3 1.18 7.80 0.34 5.25 0.18 3.28 −0.86 −5.43 0.26 0.00
4 2.06 8.46 0.44 11.22 0.38 9.56 0.69 7.63 0.16 0.00
5 1.99 9.18 0.48 10.25 0.41 9.25 0.84 5.61 0.21 0.00
6 1.01 9.57 0.18 4.24 0.08 2.94 −0.50 −5.47 0.45 0.00
7 1.42 10.11 0.28 7.62 0.22 6.67 0.63 7.03 0.36 0.00
8 1.32 10.40 0.28 7.14 0.20 4.95 −0.50 −5.33 0.41 0.00
9 1.83 10.88 0.53 10.11 0.43 9.38 0.85 6.88 0.34 0.00
10 1.48 11.20 0.44 7.35 0.30 7.30 −0.68 −5.49 0.46 0.00
11 1.78 11.72 0.38 10.33 0.31 8.62 0.72 6.70 0.30 0.00
12 1.02 12.06 0.20 4.68 0.10 2.99 −0.55 −5.76 0.55 0.00
13 1.37 12.57 0.29 8.38 0.22 6.48 0.76 6.01 0.33 0.00
14 1.37 13.01 0.48 5.93 0.32 5.86 −0.91 −5.68 0.60 0.00
15 1.37 13.81 0.31 6.58 0.21 5.66 0.97 7.11 0.48 0.00
16 1.24 14.28 0.28 6.23 0.17 4.11 −0.74 −6.24 0.54 0.00
17 1.54 14.60 0.46 8.16 0.40 7.52 −0.89 −4.80 0.40 0.00
18 1.64 14.92 0.32 8.43 0.27 7.78 −0.65 −5.43 0.34 0.00
19 1.48 15.43 0.43 8.63 0.36 7.47 1.18 5.86 0.34 0.00
20 1.35 15.63 0.33 7.38 0.23 6.19 −0.59 −4.19 0.44 0.00
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
1 7.12 7.12 1.86 29.62 1.78 30.22 – – –
2 1.09 7.75 0.25 3.66 0.11 1.91 −0.83 −4.80 0.28 0.00
3 2.26 9.45 0.39 9.72 0.34 8.48 0.92 8.19 0.17 0.00
4 6.48 11.35 1.80 26.96 1.76 27.06 1.75 10.16 0.03 0.00
5 1.59 12.71 0.33 6.50 0.28 5.77 1.11 6.85 0.36 0.00
6 1.65 13.67 0.37 5.87 0.26 4.57 −1.03 −5.34 0.40 0.00
7 1.72 14.94 0.33 6.99 0.32 6.17 1.25 5.67 0.20 0.00
8 1.52 15.78 0.39 6.10 0.31 4.93 −1.32 −5.12 0.35 0.00
9 3.02 17.90 1.03 14.00 0.93 13.08 2.69 8.42 0.26 0.00
10 1.93 19.18 0.83 8.12 0.67 7.14 −2.41 −6.27 0.52 0.00
11 1.34 20.72 0.38 4.93 0.19 2.76 −2.18 −7.33 0.45 0.00
12 2.22 22.89 0.36 9.38 0.31 8.03 1.46 7.36 0.39 0.00
13 1.51 24.14 0.35 4.88 0.23 3.69 1.82 6.06 0.43 0.00
14 2.11 25.71 0.58 7.80 0.48 7.57 −2.43 −5.93 0.40 0.00
15 2.39 28.37 0.87 10.14 0.76 8.70 3.69 7.64 0.52 0.00
16 2.53 30.37 0.53 9.58 0.44 7.91 2.40 7.12 0.31 0.00
17 1.50 32.42 0.30 5.66 0.31 5.08 2.65 7.18 0.35 0.00
18 1.63 33.89 0.37 5.95 0.28 4.99 −2.79 −5.64 0.37 0.00
19 1.84 35.78 0.47 7.04 0.37 5.93 3.54 7.35 0.30 0.00
20 2.70 37.94 0.89 9.85 0.79 9.06 −4.67 −6.91 0.44 0.00
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
1 5.82 5.82 1.51 24.22 1.47 24.26 – – –
2 2.14 6.64 0.58 8.74 0.52 8.26 0.91 6.44 0.03 0.00
3 0.91 7.53 0.18 3.28 0.09 2.01 −0.86 −5.82 0.36 0.00
4 1.35 8.60 0.29 6.18 0.31 6.04 1.00 8.65 0.17 0.00
5 1.08 9.30 0.31 4.14 0.26 3.88 −1.02 −6.38 0.42 0.00
6 2.63 10.36 0.60 12.15 0.56 11.11 1.04 7.61 0.12 0.00
7 1.39 11.30 0.29 5.53 0.26 5.16 1.00 7.23 0.28 0.00
8 1.60 11.93 0.40 5.76 0.30 5.47 −0.85 −5.62 0.44 0.00
9 1.04 12.73 0.21 4.53 0.18 3.83 −1.01 −7.44 0.36 0.00
10 1.64 14.32 0.30 5.96 0.25 5.31 1.11 7.80 0.44 0.00
11 1.69 15.73 0.36 6.73 0.30 6.20 1.43 6.79 0.33 0.00
12 1.58 16.82 0.60 6.08 0.51 5.36 2.48 5.72 0.24 0.00
13 1.48 18.06 0.41 5.29 0.29 4.47 −1.77 −5.52 0.47 0.00
14 1.39 19.46 0.32 5.22 0.26 4.62 1.68 6.05 0.40 0.00
15 1.48 20.60 0.35 5.51 0.21 4.34 −1.38 −6.25 0.58 0.00
16 1.40 21.91 0.34 5.84 0.27 4.82 1.84 6.29 0.46 0.00
17 1.27 23.41 0.39 4.82 0.25 3.46 −2.55 −6.99 0.51 0.00
18 1.44 24.36 0.34 5.16 0.28 4.72 −1.61 −4.97 0.48 0.00
19 1.58 25.45 0.33 6.59 0.28 6.08 −1.74 −5.20 0.42 0.00
20 1.88 26.52 0.58 7.12 0.50 6.53 −2.76 −4.96 0.39 0.00
13 



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

c
a

s
s

t
a
P
i
t

w
b
a
c

c

Table 5
Comparing test assets.
The table displays performance statistics of P-Tree test assets and others for comparison, including P-Tree1, which consists of 10 portfolios in the first P-Tree. P-Tree1-5, P-Tree6-10,
P-Tree11-15, P-Tree16-20, and P-Tree1-20 are sets of test assets that combine leaf basis portfolios generated by the first 5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 1-20 P-Trees, respectively.
‘‘Uni-Sort‘‘ has 150 univariate-sorted portfolios, ‘‘Bi-Sort’’ has 285 bivariate-sorted portfolios, ME/BE has 25 portfolios, and ‘‘Ind49" includes 49 industry portfolios. The reported
statistics include the number of test assets, GRS test statistics and p-values (Gibbons et al., 1989), 𝑝-values of PY test (Pesaran and Yamagata, 2023), average absolute 𝛼 (%), root
mean squared 𝛼 (%), average 𝑅2 (%) of regressing the portfolios on Fama–French five factors, and the proportion of test assets with unexplained significant alphas under 10%,
5%, and 1% significance levels. The three panels report on the re-trained models for different sample periods.

√

N GRS 𝑝-GRS 𝑝-PY |𝛼| 𝛼2 𝑅2 %𝛼10% %𝛼5% %𝛼1%
Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1 10 141.27 0.00 0.00 0.92 1.11 75 100 90 80
P-Tree1–5 50 60.32 0.00 0.00 0.44 0.61 80 70 62 44
P-Tree6–10 50 4.60 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.37 79 56 50 34
P-Tree11–15 50 4.74 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.26 80 38 36 24
P-Tree16–20 50 4.21 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.42 77 52 44 30
P-Tree1–20 200 41.31 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.43 79 54 48 33
Uni-Sort 150 1.62 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.14 88 25 18 7
Bi-Sort 285 2.50 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.17 89 30 23 15
ME-BM 25 5.01 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.16 92 36 28 20
Ind49 49 1.99 0.00 0.00 0.28 0.35 60 39 31 18
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
P-Tree1 10 84.36 0.00 0.00 1.58 1.95 70 90 80 80
P-Tree1–5 50 50.84 0.00 0.00 0.79 1.26 76 62 60 52
P-Tree6–10 50 7.27 0.00 0.00 0.58 0.87 75 56 44 38
P-Tree11–15 50 6.39 0.00 0.00 0.55 0.82 76 66 60 42
P-Tree16–20 50 8.42 0.00 0.00 0.52 0.74 76 62 54 50
P-Tree1–20 200 112.90 0.00 0.00 0.61 0.95 76 62 55 46
Uni-Sort 150 1.94 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.23 88 35 27 19
Bi-Sort 285 – – 0.00 0.21 0.30 89 42 33 21
ME-BM 25 4.75 0.00 0.00 0.21 0.25 91 56 48 32
Ind49 49 2.44 0.00 0.00 0.52 0.61 61 59 49 27
Panel C: 20 Years (2001–2020)
P-Tree1 10 56.76 0.00 0.00 1.09 1.35 68 90 90 90
P-Tree1–5 50 30.35 0.00 0.00 0.43 0.68 76 52 38 24
P-Tree6–10 50 5.17 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.37 75 34 28 14
P-Tree11–15 50 2.20 0.00 0.00 0.27 0.35 75 30 22 10
P-Tree16–20 50 2.52 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.40 76 42 28 10
P-Tree1–20 200 83.91 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.47 76 40 29 14
Uni-Sort 150 1.46 0.03 0.94 0.09 0.12 89 12 7 0
Bi-Sort 285 – – 0.01 0.11 0.15 91 21 15 6
ME-BM 25 2.58 0.00 0.10 0.11 0.14 93 24 8 8
Ind49 49 1.29 0.11 0.36 0.25 0.32 62 18 8 2
b

s
s
a
r
f
f

models for a fair comparison. The superior pricing performance remains
onsistent across Panels A to C for the entire sample and subsample
nalysis.

Third, these endogenously generated P-Tree test assets better ex-
pand the MVE frontier and raise the bar for testing asset pricing models.
The commonly used test assets set a low bar for testing factor models,
o benchmark factor models seem sufficient to price them. As we
ee from Panel A of Table 6, the listed benchmark five-factor models

have over 90% cross-sectional 𝑅2s on the benchmark test assets, and
hese numbers are consistently large in Panels B and C for subsample
nalyses. However, their 𝑅2s decline dramatically when tested against
-Tree test assets. P-Tree test assets use nonlinear and asymmetric
nteractions among a large set of characteristics, whereas benchmark
est assets involve only up to two characteristics.18

In summary, P-Tree factor models accurately price P-Tree test assets,
hile benchmark factors do not, and perform similarly or better than
enchmark factor models in pricing benchmark test assets. P-Tree test
ssets set a high standard for testing asset pricing models, surpassing
ommon sorted and industry portfolios.

18 Industry portfolios are an exception because they are not sorted based on
haracteristics.
14 
4.4. P-Tree factors for investment
The P-Tree framework clusters thousands of assets into several leaf

asis portfolios, reducing portfolio optimization complexity. These P-
Tree test assets can be used as factors directly or as building blocks
toward MVE portfolios for investment. Additionally, the frequency of
rebalancing P-Tree investment strategies can be reduced to quarterly
or annually to decrease transaction costs.
Full-sample evaluation. We evaluate the investment performance of P-
Tree factors by combining them into one — the tangency portfolio
of P-Tree factors. Table 7, Panel A, reports the P-Tree investment
trategy’s annualized Sharpe ratios and monthly alphas in the 40-year
ample. The Sharpe ratio increases from 6.37 to 9.19, 11.21, 13.83,
nd 15.64 for the one-factor strategy to 5, 10, 15, and 20 factors,
espectively. To assess their additional investment information, we
urther evaluate these P-Tree investment strategies over benchmark
actor models. These model-adjusted alphas are all greater than 0.80%

and highly statistically significant.
The existing research finds that P-Tree investment strategies have

highly competitive Sharpe ratios. The correlation-based clustering
in Ahn et al. (2009) generates basis portfolios that underperform
bivariate-sorted portfolios on ME and BM. Furthermore, Daniel et al.
(2020) nearly doubles the Sharpe ratio of the characteristics-sorted



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

T
c
f

6
s

s

T
w

i

s
O
a
P

t

Table 6
Asset pricing performance: Cross-sectional 𝑅2.

his table displays the cross-sectional 𝑅2 (%) of pricing different sets of test assets by the P-Tree factor models and benchmark factor models. The factor models are listed in the
olumns, and the different specifications of test assets are listed in the rows. Specifically, the table includes 1, 5, 10, and 20 P-Tree factor models and FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA
ive-factor models in the columns. In the rows, the test assets are from the top 1, 5, 10, and 20 P-Trees, univariate-sorted portfolios, bivariate-sorted portfolios, ME-BM 5 × 5

portfolios, and 49 industry portfolios.
P-Tree1F P-Tree5F P-Tree10F P-Tree20F FF5 Q5 RP5 IP5

Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1 98.3 99.2 – – 36.8 33.9 51.1 73.5
P-Tree1–5 65.0 82.6 90.2 95.9 54.3 55.9 56.8 49.6
P-Tree1–10 68.5 74.0 87.9 92.1 66.9 70.0 69.1 62.4
P-Tree1–20 72.1 77.9 84.3 88.9 73.8 76.8 77.8 68.6
Uni-Sort 92.7 97.3 98.5 98.7 97.0 97.9 98.0 95.3
Bi-Sort 88.7 97.2 98.0 98.5 96.1 97.5 97.3 92.9
ME-BM 88.4 98.6 98.8 99.4 96.8 97.4 97.0 96.6
Ind49 82.0 92.9 95.3 97.8 96.1 95.9 95.7 91.1
Panel B: 20 Years (1981–2000)
P-Tree1 99.3 99.3 – – 54.9 59.7 37.6 79.5
P-Tree1–5 49.2 88.5 92.6 96.0 25.8 31.8 41.1 48.6
P-Tree1–10 47.7 59.7 77.8 82.3 37.7 40.5 47.8 46.8
P-Tree1–20 42.8 54.0 70.2 74.5 42.2 45.6 52.5 50.2
Uni-Sort 80.4 96.5 96.9 97.6 94.6 95.9 97.0 94.5
Bi-Sort 66.4 92.1 93.9 94.9 89.1 91.5 92.7 91.1
ME-BM 66.6 94.0 96.2 99.0 93.4 95.3 96.4 94.5
Ind49 60.9 86.5 87.9 95.0 91.0 89.7 92.1 84.1
Panel C: 20 Year (2001–2020)
P-Tree1 99.2 99.7 – – 52.2 43.6 69.7 53.9
P-Tree1–5 71.4 87.6 92.3 94.3 60.0 60.7 64.9 61.3
P-Tree1–10 70.4 78.1 86.4 88.4 66.4 65.7 69.8 65.4
P-Tree1–20 70.5 76.4 79.8 82.8 71.7 69.9 75.4 65.2
Uni-Sort 87.5 96.6 97.6 97.9 97.3 97.2 97.4 95.7
Bi-Sort 93.0 97.2 97.9 98.4 97.9 97.5 98.0 96.9
ME-BM 92.9 95.7 98.6 99.3 97.5 97.5 97.4 96.1
Ind49 75.3 92.6 94.8 97.7 90.2 90.8 92.8 86.0
a

d
u

o

t
f
t
b
t
c
n

t
T
d
d
E

portfolio from 1.17 to 2.13 by constructing the corresponding
characteristic-efficient portfolios. However, a single P-Tree delivers a
.37 Sharpe ratio over 40 years from 1981 to 2020, representing a
ignificant improvement over Ahn et al. (2009) and Daniel et al. (2020),

although the empirical samples differ.
Out-of-sample evaluation. The results in Panel A of Table 7 are based
on a full-sample analysis, which may raise concerns about in-sample
overfitting. Therefore, we provide two exercises on OOS investment
trategies. We follow Kozak et al. (2020) and perform a half-half split

to construct the training and test samples. It suffices to demonstrate the
OOS performance when the past and future samples predict each other.

his approach further mitigates concerns regarding the look-ahead bias
hen models trained by the future sample predict the past.

On the one hand, the past-predicting-future results are reported
n Panels B1 and B2. The first twenty-year in-sample Sharpe ratios

are even higher than the forty-year ones in Panel A, and the OOS
Sharpe ratios are over 3. Despite decreasing performance, many OOS
alphas, adjusted by benchmark models, are still close to 1% and highly
ignificant. On the other hand, for the future-predicting-past result, the
OS Sharpe ratios are larger than 3.87, and the model-adjusted alphas
re over 0.80%. These findings demonstrate strong OOS evidence for
-Tree test assets and factors for spanning the MVE frontier.

The OOS investment performance results reported here are similar
o those in recent studies. The deep reinforcement learning strategy

in Cong et al. (2021) achieves a Sharpe ratio consistently above 2
from 1990 to 2021 even after excluding small stocks. Based on sorted
portfolios on size, operating profitability, and investment in Bryzgalova
et al. (2023), the regularized portfolio achieves an annualized Sharpe
ratio of 2.39 from 2004 to 2016. The deep neural network approach
in Feng et al. (2024) reports Sharpe ratios ranging from 2.95 to 3.00
from 2002 to 2021. P-Tree strategies stand out for their transparency,
 N

15 
ease of computation, and flexibility as an all-around framework for test
sset generation, asset pricing, and investment management.

5. Model extensions and discussion

We extend the P-Tree framework and applications along several
irections, covering interpretability, model complexity, characteristic
tility, and macroeconomic regimes.

5.1. Random P-Forest and P-Tree interpretability

Random forest (Breiman, 2001) grows multiple ‘‘decorrelated’’ trees
n bootstrap training samples, which are random samples of observa-

tions with replacement and a subset of variables from the complete
raining set. This is called bagging, which helps mitigate model over-
itting and quantify the uncertainty of model estimation. We can adopt
his ensemble scheme and grow multiple ‘‘decorrelated’’ P-Trees on
ootstrap training samples to form a random P-Forest. Consequently,
here are two direct applications for the random P-Forest: assessing the
haracteristic importance and recovering a robust SDF using the large
umber of ‘‘decorrelated’’ P-Trees.
Characteristic importance. The simulation evidence in Internet
Appendix I shows how the nonlinear and interactive P-Tree can recover
the true set of characteristics, despite redundant or useless characteris-
ics, leading to improved risk proxies for efficient frontier estimation.
his contrasts with a linear factor model with ad hoc factors that might
isregard these characteristics. The traditional sequential or indepen-
ent asset sorting scheme usually focuses on up to three characteristics.
numerating all possible sorting cases with multiple characteristics is
P-hard, but P-Tree’s iterative growth algorithm efficiently overcomes



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

f

Table 7
Factor investing by boosted P-Trees.
This table presents the investment performance of the initial factors produced by P-Tree and the MVE portfolio of multi-factors generated by boosted P-Trees. The reported statistics
include the annualized Sharpe ratio and alphas with respect to CAPM, FF5, Q5, RP-PCA, and IPCA five-factor models. Panel A shows the 40-year sample from 1981 to 2020.
Panels B1 and B2 present in- and out-of-sample results from 1981 to 2000 and 2001 to 2020, respectively. Panels C1 and C2 display in- and out-of-sample results from 2001 to
2020 and 1981 to 2000, respectively. We find all the 𝛼’s are significant at 1% confidence level.

SR 𝛼𝐶 𝐴𝑃 𝑀 𝛼𝐹 𝐹5 𝛼𝑄5 𝛼𝑅𝑃5 𝛼𝐼 𝑃 5
Panel A: 40 Years (1981–2020)
P-Tree1 6.37 1.39 1.37 1.36 1.28 1.12
P-Tree1–5 9.19 0.97 0.95 0.93 0.87 0.82
P-Tree1–10 11.21 1.01 1.00 0.98 0.93 0.89
P-Tree1–15 13.83 0.95 0.94 0.93 0.90 0.87
P-Tree1–20 15.64 0.97 0.96 0.95 0.93 0.90
Panel B1: 20 Years In-Sample (1981–2000)
P-Tree1 7.13 1.86 1.78 1.72 1.62 1.59
P-Tree1–5 12.74 1.54 1.51 1.48 1.37 1.41
P-Tree1–10 19.22 1.51 1.49 1.49 1.43 1.43
P-Tree1–15 28.43 1.42 1.41 1.40 1.37 1.39
P-Tree1–20 38.01 1.36 1.35 1.34 1.32 1.34
Panel B2: 20 Years Out-of-Sample (2001–2020)
P-Tree1 3.23 1.35 1.31 1.23 1.04 0.93
P-Tree1–5 3.41 1.02 1.00 0.95 0.77 0.62
P-Tree1–10 3.21 0.95 0.94 0.89 0.74 0.56
P-Tree1–15 3.12 0.89 0.89 0.83 0.69 0.48
P-Tree1–20 3.13 0.85 0.84 0.78 0.66 0.49
Panel C1: 20 Years In-Sample (2001–2020)
P-Tree1 5.83 1.51 1.47 1.50 1.52 1.69
P-Tree1–5 9.32 1.30 1.29 1.28 1.30 1.31
P-Tree1–10 14.35 1.12 1.11 1.11 1.11 1.09
P-Tree1–15 20.64 1.08 1.07 1.08 1.10 1.05
P-Tree1–20 26.57 1.09 1.08 1.08 1.10 1.11
Panel C2: 20 Years Out-of-Sample (1981–2000)
P-Tree1 4.35 1.50 1.42 1.35 1.60 1.58
P-Tree1–5 3.87 1.18 1.05 0.96 1.23 1.24
P-Tree1–10 4.29 1.02 0.93 0.85 1.14 1.10
P-Tree1–15 4.03 0.96 0.86 0.80 1.07 1.02
P-Tree1–20 3.88 0.96 0.87 0.81 1.08 1.03
s
T

m
T

s

p
b
u
b

this problem, making computation feasible.
The ensemble steps for constructing the random P-Forest are as

follows: (i) Bootstrap the data on the time-series horizon with replace-
ment and preserve the complete cross section of the panel data for the
selected time periods to exploit the low serial correlations among asset
returns. (ii) Randomly select 20 characteristics and independently grow
P-Trees on each bootstrap sample. These two steps are repeated 1000
times to create a forest of 1000 P-Trees.

We study how often a characteristic is chosen for a split in the
random P-Forest. A characteristic selected more often is seen as more
important for maximizing mean–variance efficiency. In each bootstrap
sample, 20 characteristics are randomly drawn to grow the tree, with
only some chosen as split variables. We count the number of times
a specific 𝑙th characteristic 𝑧𝑙 is used in the first 𝐽 splits and the
total number of appearances. We define the measure of characteristic
importance as follows:

( )

 ( ) # 𝑧 is selected at first 𝐽 splits
Select. Prob. 𝑧 𝑙

𝑙 = (

# 𝑧𝑙 appears in all bootstrap ) . (7)
subsamples

Table 8 summarizes the selection probabilities (7) of characteristics
for 𝐽 = 1, 2, 3. The selection probability increases as 𝐽 grows from 1 to
3, so we must compare within the row. For each row, we list the top
ive selected characteristics.

The earnings surprise (SUE), one of the most important fundamen-
tals, has a 50% chance of being the first splitting characteristic and
a 66% chance of being one of the top two splitting characteristics in
the bootstrap sample. While not incorporated into linear factor models
like FF5 and Q5, SUE is most valuable in nonlinear interactive mod-
eling for maximizing the mean–variance efficiency. Other frequently
 p

16 
Table 8
Characteristic importance by selection probability.
This table reports the most frequently selected characteristics from the random P-Forest
of 1000 trees. The ‘‘Top 1’’ rows only count the first split for 1000 trees. The ‘‘Top 2’’
or ‘‘Top 3’’ rows only count the first two or three splits. The numbers reported are the
election frequency for these top characteristics selected out of the 1000 ensembles.
he descriptions of characteristics are listed in Table 1.

1 2 3 4 5

Top1 SUE SVAR CHPM RVAR_CAPM BASPREAD
0.51 0.34 0.25 0.23 0.21

Top2 SUE SVAR DOLVOL CHPM BM_IA
0.66 0.38 0.34 0.31 0.31

Top3 SUE DOLVOL BM_IA SVAR ME_IA
0.71 0.53 0.48 0.41 0.41

selected characteristics are return volatility (SVAR), dollar trading vol-
ume (DOLVOL), idiosyncratic volatility (RVAR_CAPM), change in profit

argin (CHPM), and industry-adjusted book-to-market ratio (BM_IA).
he characteristics in Table 8 cover four major categories – momentum,

frictions, profitability, value – in the top splits. Note that characteristics
not selected do not necessarily mean they are useless, as this table only
hows the top three splits.
Interpretability V. S. overfitting. The random P-Forest may be over-
arameterized and challenging for visualization and interpretation,
ut it offers several advantages. (i) Random P-Forest addresses model
ncertainty and can evaluate characteristic importance by multiple
ootstrap samples. In other words, the single P-Tree is readily inter-
retable as it visually depicts characteristics for non-linearities and



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

w

p
t
w

w
b

p
T c

2
d
T e
m F
b S
w
s

s

o
i
m

Fig. 8. OOS Performance of Random P-Forest SDF.
his figure reports the Sharpe ratio, and pricing error (HJD) of the realized OOS SDF

portfolio. Each P-Tree in the Random P-Forest is fed with 10 characteristics, randomly
rawn without replacement from 61 ones, and generates 10 leaf basis portfolios.
hese P-Trees are independently trained. P-Trees are split with goal-oriented criteria to
aximize the collective Sharpe ratio of leaf basis portfolios. The total number of leaf

asis portfolios is denoted 𝑃 . The horizontal axis shows model complexity 𝑐 = 𝑃∕𝑇 ,
ith 𝑐 ranging from 0.1 to 100 and 𝑇 = 240 months. We report five specifications with

hrinkage parameter 𝛾 in [10−5 , 10−1 , 1, 10, 1000].

asymmetric interactions, but the model’s efficacy may be limited if
we cannot demonstrate that it does not overfit. In contrast, random
P-Forest utilizes multiple random bootstrap samples, which helps mit-
igate the risk of overfitting. (ii) Random P-Forest offers an alternative
to boosting for creating multiple test assets. Unlike boosting, which
generates assets sequentially, random P-Forest independently creates
assets across P-Trees.

In addition to the OOS evaluation in Table 7 for assessing model
overfitting, we also compare key characteristics between the random
P-Forest and the single P-Tree. The selected characteristics of the
single P-Tree are also shown as important by the random P-Forest,
suggesting that the single P-Tree is not overfitted. The consistent results
may be attributed to the P-Tree’s global split criteria, which prevent
verfitting, similar to ML ensemble methods, while providing greater
nterpretability and transparent insights into non-linearities and asym-
etric interactions. The significant characteristics obtained from the
17 
random P-Forest, such as earning surprise (SUE), dollar trading volume
(DOLVOL), and industry-adjusted book-to-market ratio (BM_IA), are
also chosen in the top splits of P-Tree for the 40 years, as illustrated
in Fig. 4. In addition, the important characteristics listed in Table 8 are
also selected in the top splits displayed in the P-Tree diagram for the
subsample analysis (refer to Fig. A.1).

5.2. Random P-Forest and complexity

Our random P-Forest also relates to the growing popularity of large
models in finance. In this recent literature, researchers usually question
whether model performance improves as the model size increases,

hich joins the recent statistical literature on ‘‘Benign Overfitting’’
and ‘‘High-Dimensional Interpolation’’ (e.g., Belkin et al., 2019; Hastie
et al., 2022) and ‘‘the Virtue of Complexity’’ in financial applica-
tions (e.g., Kelly et al., 2022, 2024; Didisheim et al., 2024). This
literature shows that large regularized models, which have a large
number of parameters relative to the number of observations, can also
erform well out-of-sample, and their performance even improves as
he number of parameters increases. This goes against the traditional
isdom of using parsimonious modeling in statistics and finance.

Random P-Forest constructs numerous uncorrelated P-Trees inde-
pendently on randomly bootstrapped samples, allowing it to be ex-
panded as a large model with both statistical and economic regulariza-
tions. These hundreds of P-Trees and thousands of leaf basis portfolios
are similar to the randomly generated portfolios in Didisheim et al.
(2024). We can estimate the SDF (tangency portfolio) using all the
leaf basis portfolios in the forest and report their OOS performances
to demonstrate the large model performance.

We create this random P-Forest SDF by (i) randomly selecting 𝐿
characteristics for a P-Tree, growing P-Tree with split criteria (4). (ii)
repeating the procedure (i) for 𝐵 times to form a forest of 𝐵 P-Trees

ith parallel computing. (iii) estimating the SDF weight on all the leaf
asis portfolios in the random P-Forest with (8) based on in-sample

data. We adopt the ridge (ridgeless) SDF estimator in Didisheim et al.
(2024) to estimate the SDF weights 𝑤̂ on leaf basis portfolios19:

[ ]

( )

𝑤̂(𝛾) = arg min𝐸 1 −𝑤′𝐑 2
𝑡 + 𝛾‖𝑤 2

‖ , (8)
𝑤

where 𝛾 is a shrinkage parameter. We also investigate the large model
erformance and define 𝑐 = 𝑃∕𝑇 as the degree of parameterization or
omplexity, where 𝑃 is the number of leaf basis portfolios, and 𝑇 =
40 is the fixed estimation rolling window. We examine the effects of
xtensive parameterization and shrinkage estimation on the random P-
orest SDF across various values for 𝑐 and 𝛾. In addition to the OOS
harpe ratio, we also report the OOS Pricing Error = 𝐸𝑂 𝑂 𝑆 [(1 −𝑤̂′𝐑𝑡)2].

The Pricing Error is the OOS HJ distance (Hansen and Jagannathan,
1997), which has the above expression when 𝑃 > 𝑇𝑂 𝑂 𝑆 and both are
ufficiently large.

Fig. 8 displays the OOS performances of the random P-Forest SDF
with 𝐿 = 10 random characteristics from 2001 to 2020. As 𝑐 increases,
we find (i) the Sharpe ratio exhibits double ascent for low shrinkage
cases and permanent ascent for high shrinkage cases, and (ii) the
pricing error decreases for high shrinkage cases, with a spike around
𝑐 = 1 for low shrinkage cases. These patterns are similar to those
in Didisheim et al. (2024), demonstrating the benefit of randomness
and large model size in the OOS performance of the random P-Forest
SDF. For 𝑐 = 10, the Sharpe ratio is about 4.0, and the pricing error is
below 0.44. For 𝑐 = 100, the Sharpe ratio becomes about 4.5, and the
pricing error is below 0.38.

19 Britten-Jones (1999) introduces a regression approach to estimate the tan-
gency portfolio and Ao et al. (2019) extend the framework to the regularized
portfolio by allowing a large number of assets.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 
Fig. 9. Demonstration for ME baseline and ME-BM baseline P-Trees.
Fig. 10. Evaluating a characteristic with P-Tree.
This figure shows the Sharpe ratio of P-Tree basis portfolios after splitting on a characteristic, based on either ME or ME-BM baseline P-Trees. Sub-figures (a) and (b) display the
results for ME and ME-BM baseline P-Trees, respectively. We sort the characteristics by their Sharpe ratios in ascending order. The red lines show the Sharpe ratios of P-Tree basis
portfolios after splitting one step further on the controlling characteristics. A bar above the red line indicates incremental information against the benchmark characteristics and
is colored black. Otherwise, the gray bar indicates the characteristic does not provide incremental information. The characteristics are listed in Table 1.
Goal-oriented P-Tree v.s. random split P-Tree. The random P-Forest SDF
involves randomness as a subset of characteristics is randomly drawn
for each P-Tree, but split decisions are not made randomly. Goal-
oriented search in P-Tree helps the leaf basis portfolios to maximize
the collective Sharpe ratio efficiently. However, Didisheim et al. (2024)
show that random portfolios can also generate the SDF with excellent
OOS performances if the number of portfolios is large enough. We show
the significance of goal-oriented search in maximizing mean–variance
efficiency in an over-parameterized setting by presenting an alternative
SDF specification for comparison. Specifically, the random split SDF uses
random split criteria to create leaf basis portfolios, with no specific split
18 
criterion and characteristics and splitting values being randomly chosen
for each decision to generate ten leaf basis portfolios.

The random P-Forest SDF exhibits comparable patterns to the ran-
dom split SDF, but the random P-Forest is significantly more efficient
regarding parameterization and computational expense. Specifically, it
requires less complexity to achieve the same level of Sharpe ratio and
pricing error as the random split SDF. Therefore, goal-oriented search
improves the efficiency of large models with both statistical and eco-
nomic regularizations, aligning with the idea of combining economic
objectives with ML models in finance research. Internet Appendix III
elaborates further.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

b

n
b
f
a
m
e
t
p
i
b

P f
T

p
e
l
i
c
T

F
c ‘

f

T
t

e
(

T
b
s
v
A
n s
C b
a s
m b

p
f
t
o
f
d
e

Finally, from the test asset construction perspective, the goal-
oriented P-Tree provides practically useful test assets for asset pricing
model estimation and evaluation. The number of test assets is typically
less than 100 because the statistical power of the asset pricing test is
low when this number is large (Fan et al., 2015).

5.3. Evaluating a characteristic with P-Tree.
As an alternative pricing kernel, P-Tree can directly evaluate a

ew characteristic’s incremental (and nonlinear) contribution over a
enchmark to complement the literature. Researchers develop new
actors by sorting based on specific characteristics in empirical studies
nd then test their independent information by controlling benchmark
odels through spanning regression. However, empirical studies rarely

xamine whether the associated characteristics provide new informa-
ion and may cause information loss. To address this issue, P-Tree
rovides a new perspective for evaluating the usefulness of character-
stics in generating test assets and latent factor models, given a set of
enchmark characteristics, such as ME and BM.

In Fig. 9, we show two baseline P-Trees: a three-layer ME baseline
-Tree with all splits based on ME and a 3-layer ME-BM baseline P-
ree with the first layer split on ME and the second layer split on BM.

To assess the incremental utility of estimating the efficient frontier of
a characteristic against ME, we extend the ME baseline P-Tree with
an additional split on the characteristic of interest or ME. One might
expect a split to increase the Sharpe ratio of an MVE portfolio for a
shallow P-Tree. Therefore, We only assess if a characteristic offers new
information by comparing the Sharpe ratio improvement when adding
it to the baseline P-Tree over a split on ME. This method helps us gauge
the incremental impact of the characteristic in question.

In Fig. 10, subfigure (a) shows the incremental Sharpe ratio of each
haracteristic on the ME baseline P-Tree. We highlight characteristics

outperforming ME in black and those underperforming ME in gray. We
also sort the characteristics by their Sharpe ratios. Even for a shallow P-

ree, 24 characteristics do not provide incremental information against
he ME baseline P-Tree. Further, we identify categories other than

size, including momentum (SUE, ABR, NINCR), value (BM_IA, BM,
CFP, EP), profitability (CHPM, ROA, ROE), and frictions/volatility
(MAXRET, SVAR), that vastly improve investment performance by a
simple further split on the ME baseline P-Tree.

In summary, we assess each characteristic on a benchmark P-Tree
by controlling ME and/or BM for its marginal contribution to the
investment objective. We can expect these marginal contributions to
be smaller when considering a deeper tree as the benchmark. The rel-
ative importance of a characteristic may change when the benchmark
P-Tree or controlling characteristics are altered, highlighting the adapt-
able nature of P-Tree evaluation. This evaluation can complement the
conventional factor-spanning regression in evaluating characteristics.

Similarly, we assess each characteristic using the ME-BM baseline P-
ree shown in subfigure (b) of Fig. 9. This P-Tree has three layers and is
ased on ME and BM. With a stronger benchmark, some characteristics,
uch as RDM, ILL, HIRE, MOM6M, CINVEST, SP, do not pro-
ide additional information on this upgraded ME-BM baseline P-Tree.
gainst the ME-BM baseline P-Tree, we find that 30 characteristics do
ot offer incremental information for estimating the efficient frontier.
onsistent with the ME baseline P-Tree results, momentum, value,
nd profitability characteristics are useful in the nonlinear interactive
odel.

5.4. P-Tree with macroeconomic regimes
Increasing empirical evidence indicates factor risk premia and load-

ings can vary significantly under various macroeconomic conditions.
Given that the cross-sectional driving forces may change over time,
examining how P-Tree performs in different states and which charac-
teristics are selected for the mean–variance diversification is valuable.
This subsection presents the subsample analysis for implementing P-
Trees under various macro regimes and demonstrates their robust
performance.
19 
Characteristics evaluation under regimes. We conduct robustness checks
y analyzing ten macro variables from Table 2 for subsample analysis

in different regimes. The empirical results of P-Tree models under
various regimes are shown in Table 9. We divide the sample into top
and bottom regimes using the 50% 10-year rolling-window percentiles
and fit a separate model for each regime. This allows us to assess the
effectiveness of P-Tree in both positive and negative macroeconomic
environments. 20

First, the useful characteristics may vary depending on different
macroeconomic conditions. P-Tree performs well, adjusts to macroeco-
nomic changes, and chooses different characteristics for the top three
splits. For example, when the term spread is low, or market volatility
is high, the roles of SUE and DOVOL for firm fundamentals and trading
volume are more important for cross-sectional mean–variance diversifi-
cation. However, characteristics such as BASPREAD and RVAR_CAPM,
representing frictions for liquidity and volatility, are often chosen for
scenarios involving high net equity issuance, low default yield, low
market liquidity, or low inflation.

Second, P-Tree test assets consistently provide informative results
or asset pricing considerations: the GRS tests against Fama–French five

factors are rejected for each regime, and the Sharpe ratios of the MVE
ortfolios spanned by P-Tree test assets are all greater than 7. Inter-
stingly, the GRS statistics (weighted pricing errors) are significantly
arger for scenarios that involve low inflation or a low t-bill rate, which
mplies the weakest moments of commonly used factors capturing the
ross-sectional signals. The average alphas are larger than those of ‘‘P-
ree1’’ in Table 7, Panel A, implying the test assets under extreme

macro regimes are even more challenging to price by common factors.
inally, we combine the P-Tree factors in two regimes and find the

‘Com’’ (Combined) factor has larger Sharpe ratios than the first P-Tree
actor in Table 7, Panel A, which implements an unconditional model.

6. Conclusion
Estimating the mean–variance efficient frontier using individual

asset returns and creating diversified test assets for asset pricing model
valuations constitute longstanding empirical challenges
e.g., Markowitz, 1952; Lewellen et al., 2010; Daniel et al., 2020). Our

paper introduces a new class of tree-based models, Panel Tree (P-Tree),
that effectively addresses these empirical challenges and analyzes the
(unbalanced) panel of individual asset returns by generalizing multi-
characteristics security sorting and splitting the cross section. Under
the global criteria of mean–variance efficiency, P-Tree utilizes high-
dimensional characteristics, which contain rich information on the
joint distribution of asset returns, to generate characteristics-managed
portfolios and recover the stochastic discount factor. More generally, P-
Trees expand tree-based and other ML models beyond pure prediction,
effectively analyzing panel data by economic-guided objectives, while
maintaining interpretability and handling asymmetric and nonlinear
interactions in low signal-to-noise environments.

Our empirical study of U.S. equities shows that P-Tree test assets
ignificantly advance the efficient frontier compared to that spanned
y those commonly used test assets (e.g., bivariate- or univariate-
orted portfolios) and exhibit significant unexplained alphas against
enchmark models (e.g., Fama–French factors), highlighting the im-
ortance of test assets. These findings remain consistent and robust
or the out-of-sample evaluation in the recent two decades. Second,
he P-Tree tangency portfolio is constructed as traded factor models,
utperforming popular observable and ML latent factor models for
actor investment and cross-sectional pricing performance. Third, we
emonstrate the versatility and utility of sparse tree-based models for
conomic interpretation. For example, we identify SUE, DOLVOL, and

20 For identifying macro regime shifts through time-series splits, Feng et al.
(2025) adapt the P-Tree framework for currency return dynamics.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 
Table 9
P-Tree performance under regime switches.
This table shows the performance of P-Tree models across various macroeconomic states. The time series of each macro variable is split into ‘‘Top’’ and ‘‘Btm’’ regimes using the
50% 10-year rolling-window percentiles. A simple P-Tree is then built for each regime, and similar performance statistics are reported in Table 5, along with the top three splitting
characteristics. The rows labeled ‘‘Com’’ report the average return and Sharpe ratio of the combined P-Tree factor of the ‘‘Top’’ and ‘‘Btm’’ regimes.

√

Regime AVG SR GRS 𝑝-value |𝛼 𝛼2 𝑅2
| Top three characteristics

Top 1.78 6.14 71.84 0.00 1.27 1.57 52.69 SUE DOLVOL CFP
DFY Btm 1.21 4.56 40.01 0.00 1.08 1.44 60.05 ABR RVAR_CAPM STD_DOLVOL

Com 1.49 5.16
Top 1.45 5.84 43.17 0.00 1.03 1.30 73.16 CHPM BM_IA ME

DY Btm 1.30 6.21 101.56 0.00 1.05 1.21 51.45 ABR ZEROTRADE DOLVOL
Com 1.35 6.03
Top 0.99 5.51 34.85 0.00 0.94 1.28 78.21 RVAR_CAPM ME_IA ME

EP Btm 1.34 6.04 98.62 0.00 0.94 1.18 56.89 SUE DOLVOL BM_IA
Com 1.24 5.76
Top 1.10 5.90 89.15 0.00 0.81 1.04 62.31 RVAR_CAPM SUE STD_DOLVOL

ILL Btm 1.50 7.44 72.13 0.00 1.03 1.30 59.38 SUE DOLVOL SP
Com 1.24 6.21
Top 1.16 4.83 30.10 0.00 0.99 1.29 75.20 CFP ATO ME

INFL Btm 1.29 6.61 107.40 0.00 0.93 1.26 57.67 SUE DOLVOL CFP
Com 1.25 5.89
Top 1.33 5.10 38.77 0.00 0.89 1.14 65.03 CFP ALM STD_DOLVOL

LEV Btm 1.39 5.36 66.94 0.00 1.23 1.46 52.23 NI MOM12M BM_IA
Com 1.37 5.26
Top 1.37 5.05 45.70 0.00 1.67 2.16 53.03 RVAR_CAPM ME_IA RD_SALE

NI Btm 1.51 6.71 93.02 0.00 1.18 1.38 61.79 ROA DOLVOL SUE
Com 1.45 5.81
Top 1.24 6.22 72.03 0.00 0.94 1.24 62.66 SUE DOLVOL CFP

SVAR Btm 1.23 4.78 43.92 0.00 1.18 1.38 59.41 ROA ZEROTRADE ABR
Com 1.23 5.36
Top 1.09 7.15 59.53 0.00 0.75 0.91 61.98 CHCSHO SUE DOLVOL

TBL Btm 1.30 7.05 134.30 0.00 0.93 1.10 63.44 SUE DOLVOL CFP
Com 1.24 6.97
Top 1.17 6.01 67.58 0.00 0.99 1.28 63.45 EP STD_DOLVOL SUE

TMS Btm 1.23 5.82 70.00 0.00 0.86 1.17 52.52 SUE DOLVOL BM_IA
Com 1.20 5.91
BM_IA as key characteristics that interact to explain the cross-section
of asset returns. Finally, P-Tree captures the complexity of panel stock
returns with sparsity, achieving exceptional OOS Sharpe ratios close
to those of over-parameterized large models. Beyond asset pricing,
our framework offers an interpretable and computationally efficient
alternative to deep-learning-based AI for goal-oriented search in large
modeling spaces.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lin William Cong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – origi-
nal draft, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Formal analysis, Con-
ceptualization. Guanhao Feng: Writing – review & editing, Writing
– original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Re-
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding
acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jingyu
He: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization,
Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project administration,
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Xin He: Writing – review & editing, Writ-
ing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Software, Methodology,
Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

Appendix A

See Algorithm 1 and Fig. A.1.
20 
Fig. A.1. Panel tree diagram for subsamples.
Format follows Fig. 4. Subfigure (a) shows P-Tree in the sample from 1981–2000.
Subfigure (b) shows P-Tree in the sample from 2001–2020.



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 

D

Algorithm Growing a Single P-Tree
1: procedure GrowTree(root)
2: Input Asset returns 𝐫𝑖,𝑡 and ranked characteristics 𝐳𝑖,𝑡
3: outcome Grow P-Tree from the root node, form leaf basis portfolios
4: for 𝑗 from 1 to 𝐽 do ⊳ Loop over number of iterations
5: if current depth ≥ 𝑑max then
6: return.
7: else
8: Search the tree, find all leaf nodes 
9: for each leaf node 𝑁 in  do ⊳ Loop over all current leaf

nodes
10: for each candidate split 𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 in 𝑁 do
11: Partition data temporally in 𝑁 according to 𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 .
12: if Either left or right child of 𝑁 does not satisfy minimal

leaf size then
13: (𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 ) = −∞.
14: else
15: Calculate leaf basis portfolios.
16: Estimate tangency portfolio using all leaf basis

portfolios as in (2).
17: Calculate the split criteria (𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 ) in (4).
18: end if
19: end for
20: end for
21: Find the best 𝐜̃lea

𝑗 =
f noadreg manadx sp{lit (r𝐜̃ule that maximize split criteria

𝑘,𝑚,𝑁 )}
𝑁∈ ,𝐜̃𝑘,𝑚,𝑁∈𝑁

22: Split the node selected with the 𝑗-th split rule of the tree 𝐜̃𝑗 .
23: end if
24: end for

{ }

25: return 𝐑(𝐽 )
𝑡 , 𝑓 (𝐽 )

𝑡
26: end procedure

Appendix B. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2025.104024.

Data availability

Growing the Efficient Frontier on Panel Trees (Original data) (Mendeley
ata)

References

Ahn, D.-H., Conrad, J., Dittmar, R.F., 2009. Basis assets. Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (12),
5133–5174.

Ait-Sahalia, Y., Xiu, D., 2017. Using principal component analysis to estimate a high
dimensional factor model with high-frequency data. J. Econometrics 201 (2),
384–399.

Ang, A., Liu, J., Schwarz, K., 2020. Using Stocks or Portfolios in Tests of Factor Models.
J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 55, 709–750.

Ao, M., Yingying, L., Zheng, X., 2019. Approaching mean-variance efficiency for large
portfolios. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (7), 2890–2919.

Avramov, D., Cheng, S., Metzker, L., 2023. Machine learning vs. economic restrictions:
Evidence from stock return predictability. Manag. Sci. 69 (5), 2587–2619.

Bali, T.G., Beckmeyer, H., Moerke, M., Weigert, F., 2023. Option return predictability
with machine learning and big data. Rev. Financ. Stud. 36 (9), 3548–3602.

Banz, R.W., 1981. The relationship between return and market value of common stocks.
J. Financ. Econ. 9 (1), 3–18.

Barillas, F., Shanken, J., 2017. Which alpha? Rev. Financ. Stud. 30 (4), 1316–1338.
Belkin, M., Hsu, D., Ma, S., Mandal, S., 2019. Reconciling modern machine-learning

practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (32),
15849–15854.

Bianchi, D., Büchner, M., Tamoni, A., 2021. Bond risk premiums with machine learning.
Rev. Financ. Stud. 34 (2), 1046–1089.

Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45 (1), 5–32.
Breiman, L., Friedman, J.H., Olshen, R.A., Stone, C.J., 1984. Classification and

Regression Trees. Routledge.
21 
Britten-Jones, M., 1999. The sampling error in estimates of mean-variance efficient
portfolio weights. J. Financ. 54 (2), 655–671.

Bryzgalova, S., Pelger, M., Zhu, J., 2023. Forest through the trees: Building
cross-sections of stock returns. J. Financ. Forthcom..

Capponi, A., Yu, S., 2024. Price Discovery in the Machine Learning Age. Technical
report, Columbia University.

Chen, Y., Cliff, M., Zhao, H., 2017. Hedge funds: The good, the bad, and the lucky. J.
Financ. Quant. Anal. 52 (3), 1081–1109.

Chen, L., Pelger, M., Zhu, J., 2024. Deep learning in asset pricing. Manag. Sci. 70 (2),
714–750.

Chipman, H.A., George, E.I., McCulloch, R.E., 2010. BART: Bayesian additive regression
trees. Ann. Appl. Stat. 4, 266–298.

Chordia, T., Subrahmanyam, A., Anshuman, V.R., 2001. Trading activity and expected
stock returns. J. Financ. Econ. 59 (1), 3–32.

Cochrane, J.H., 2011. Presidential address: Discount rates. J. Financ. 66 (4), 1047–1108.
Cong, L.W., Feng, G., He, J., Li, J., 2023. Uncommon Factors and Asset Heterogeneity

in the Cross Section and Time Series. Technical report, City University of Hong
Kong.

Cong, L.W., Feng, G., He, J., Wang, Y., 2024. Mosaics of Predictability. Technical report,
City University of Hong Kong.

Cong, L.W., Tang, K., Wang, J., Zhang, Y., 2021. AlphaPortfolio: Direct Construction
Trough Deep Reinforcement Learning and Interpretable AI. Technical report,
Cornell University.

Creal, D., Kim, J., 2023. Empirical Asset Pricing with Bayesian Regression Trees.
Technical report, University of Notre Dame.

Da, Z., Gurun, U.G., Warachka, M., 2014. Frog in the pan: Continuous information and
momentum. Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (7), 2171–2218.

Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997. Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. J. Financ. 52 (3), 1035–1058.

Daniel, K., Mota, L., Rottke, S., Santos, T., 2020. The cross-section of risk and returns.
Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 1927–1979.

Didisheim, A., Ke, S., Kelly, B., Malamud, S., 2024. APT or ‘‘AIPT’’? The Surprising
Dominance of Large Factor Models. Technical report, Yale University.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1996. Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies. J.
Financ. 51 (1), 55–84.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 116
(1), 1–22.

Fan, J., Ke, Z.T., Liao, Y., Neuhierl, A., 2022. Structural Deep Learning in Conditional
Asset Pricing. Technical report, Princeton University.

Fan, J., Liao, Y., Yao, J., 2015. Power enhancement in high-dimensional cross-sectional
tests. Econometrica 83 (4), 1497–1541.

Feng, G., Giglio, S., Xiu, D., 2020. Taming the factor zoo: A test of new factors. J.
Financ. 75 (3), 1327–1370.

Feng, G., He, J., Li, J., Sarno, L., Zhang, Q., 2025. Currency Return Dynamics: What
Is the Role of U.S. Macroeconomic Regimes?. Technical report, City University of
Hong Kong.

Feng, G., He, J., Polson, N.G., Xu, J., 2024. Deep Learning in Characteristics-Sorted
Factor Models. J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 59 (7), 3001–3036.

Feng, G., Jiang, L., Li, J., Song, Y., 2023. Deep Tangency Portfolio. Technical report,
City University of Hong Kong.

Freund, Y., Schapire, R.E., 1997. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and an application to boosting. J. Comput. System Sci. 55 (1), 119–139.

Gagliardini, P., Ossola, E., Scaillet, O., 2016. Time-varying risk premium in large
cross-sectional equity data sets. Econometrica 84 (3), 985–1046.

Gibbons, M.R., Ross, S.A., Shanken, J., 1989. A test of the efficiency of a given portfolio.
Econometrica 1121–1152.

Giglio, S., Xiu, D., Zhang, D., 2023. Test Assets and Weak Factors. J. Financ. Forthcom..
Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2020. Empirical asset pricing via machine learning. Rev.

Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2223–2273.
Gu, S., Kelly, B., Xiu, D., 2021. Autoencoder asset pricing models. J. Econometrics 222

(1), 429–450.
Hansen, L.P., Jagannathan, R., 1997. Assessing specification errors in stochastic

discount factor models. J. Financ. 52 (2), 557–590.
Hastie, T., Montanari, A., Rosset, S., Tibshirani, R.J., 2022. Surprises in

high-dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. Ann. Stat. 50 (2), 949.
He, J., Hahn, P.R., 2023. Stochastic tree ensembles for regularized nonlinear regression.

J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 118 (541), 551–570.
He, A., Huang, D., Li, J., Zhou, G., 2023. Shrinking factor dimension: A reduced-rank

approach. Manag. Sci. 69 (9), 5501–5522.
He, J., Yalov, S., Hahn, P.R., 2019. XBART: Accelerated Bayesian additive regression

trees. In: The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics.
pp. 1130–1138.

Hoberg, G., Welch, I., 2009. Optimized vs. Sort-Based Portfolios. Technical report,
University of Southern California.

Hou, K., Mo, H., Xue, C., Zhang, L., 2021. An augmented q-factor model with expected
growth. Rev. Financ. 25 (1), 1–41.

Jarrow, R.A., Murataj, R., Wells, M.T., Zhu, L., 2023. The low-volatility anomaly and
the adaptive multi-factor model. Int. J. Theor. Appl. Finance 26 (04n05), 2350020.

Jensen, T.I., Kelly, B.T., Malamud, S., Pedersen, L.H., 2024. Machine learning and the
implementable efficient frontier. Rev. Financ. Stud. Forthcom..



L.W. Cong et al. Journal of Financial Economics 167 (2025) 104024 
Kelly, B., Malamud, S., Zhou, K., 2022. The virtue of complexity everywhere. Yale
Universtiy.

Kelly, B., Malamud, S., Zhou, K., 2024. The virtue of complexity in return prediction.
J. Financ. (1), 459–503.

Kelly, B., Pruitt, S., Su, Y., 2019. Characteristics are covariances: A unified model of
risk and return. J. Financ. Econ. 134 (3), 501–524.

Kim, S., Korajczyk, R.A., Neuhierl, A., 2021. Arbitrage portfolios. Rev. Financ. Stud.
34 (6), 2813–2856.

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., 2022. When Do Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing Factors Span the
Stochastic Discount Factor?. Technical report, University of Michigan.

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2018. Interpreting factor models. J. Financ. 73 (3),
1183–1223.

Kozak, S., Nagel, S., Santosh, S., 2020. Shrinking the cross-section. J. Financ. Econ.
135 (2), 271–292.

Lee, C.M., Swaminathan, B., 2000. Price momentum and trading volume. J. Financ. 55
(5), 2017–2069.

Lettau, M., Pelger, M., 2020. Factors that fit the time series and cross-section of stock
returns. Rev. Financ. Stud. 33 (5), 2274–2325.
22 
Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., Shanken, J., 2010. A skeptical appraisal of asset pricing tests.
J. Financ. Econ. 96 (2), 175–194.

Liu, W., 2006. A liquidity-augmented capital asset pricing model. J. Financ. Econ. 82
(3), 631–671.

Lopez-Lira, A., Roussanov, N.L., 2020. Do Common Factors Really Explain the
Cross-Section of Stock Returns?. Technical report, University of Pennsylvania.

Markowitz, H., 1952. Portfolio selection. J. Financ. 7, 77–99.
Patton, A.J., Weller, B.M., 2022. Risk price variation: The missing half of empirical

asset pricing. Rev. Financ. Stud. 35 (11), 5127–5184.
Pesaran, M.H., Yamagata, T., 2023. Testing for alpha in linear factor pricing models

with a large number of securities. J. Financ. Econ..
Rendleman, Jr., R.J., Jones, C.P., Latane, H.A., 1982. Empirical anomalies based on

unexpected earnings and the importance of risk adjustments. J. Financ. Econ. 10
(3), 269–287.

Rossi, A.G., Timmermann, A., 2015. Modeling covariance risk in Merton’s ICAPM. Rev.
Financ. Stud. 28 (5), 1428–1461.

Sorensen, E.H., Miller, K.L., Ooi, C.K., 2000. The decision tree approach to stock
selection. J. Portf. Manag. 27 (1), 42–52.